--- PAGE 1 ---
Purification, Molecular Cloning, and Expression of a Human
Stratum Corneum Trypsin-like Serine Protease with Possible
Function in Desquamation*
(Received for publication, May 17, 1999)
Maria Brattsand and Torbjo ¨ rn Egelrud‡
From the Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Dermatology and Venereology, Umeå University,
SE-901 85 Umeå, Sweden
A new human 33-kDa serine protease was purified
from human epidermis, and its cDNA was cloned from a
keratinocyte library, from mRNA from a human kerati-
nocyte line (HaCat) and from mRNA from human skin.
Polyclonal antibodies specific for the new protein de-
tected three groups of proteins in partially purified ex-
tracts of cornified eptihelium of human plantar skin.
The three components are proposed to correspond to
proenzyme, active enzyme, and proteolytically modified
active enzyme. After N-deglycosylation, there was a de-
crease in apparent molecular mass of all detected com-
ponents. Expression of the cloned cDNA in a eukaryotic
virus-derived system yielded a recombinant protein
that could be converted to an active protease by treat-
ment with trypsin. Polymerase chain reaction analyses
of cDNA from a number of human tissues showed high
expression of the new enzyme in the skin and low ex-
pression in brain, placenta, and kidney. Homology
searches yielded the highest score for porcine enamel
matrix protease (55% amino acid sequence homology).
High scores were also obtained for human and mouse
neuropsin and for human stratum corneum chymotryp-
tic enzyme. The function of this new protease, tenta-
tively named stratum corneum tryptic enzyme, may be
related to stratum corneum turnover and desquamation
in the epidermis.
In order to fulfill its role as an efficient physical-chemical
barrier, the outermost layer of the skin, the stratum corneum,
must have a high mechanical as well as chemical resistance.
The cellular building blocks of the stratum corneum, the cor-
neocytes, are well adapted to their function. The integration of
the properties of individual corneocytes into the tissue as a
functioning unit depends on strong intercellular adhesive
structures. There is now strong evidence that the modified
desmosomes of the stratum corneum play a crucial role in this
context (1–3).
The stratum corneum is continuously being formed in the
process of epidermal differentiation, in which a fraction of the
basal, proliferating keratinocytes leave the basal membrane
and migrate, while differentiating, toward the skin surface.
Eventually, the cells become mature, anucleated, anabolically
dead corneocytes. The cells stay in the stratum corneum for
2–4 weeks and are then shed from the skin surface in the
process of desquamation.
The mechanisms involved in desquamation and their regu-
lation are poorly understood. Since corneocytes are anabolically
dead and not responding to common cellular stimuli, the mech-
anisms responsible for desquamation must be present in the
tissue when the deepest parts of the stratum corneum are
being formed. In order not to interfere with stratum corneum
function, these mechanisms must, however, be “programmed”
to be more or less inactive for several weeks and then become
activated.
During the last several years, it has become clear that one of
the mechanisms involved in desquamation is a well regulated
proteolysis of intercellular adhesive structures (4, 5). There is
evidence that one of the enzymes involved may be stratum
corneum chymotryptic enzyme (SCCE)
1 (6–9). This serine pro-
tease with chymotrypsin-like primary substrate specificity
(10), which has been cloned and expressed in mammalian cells
(9), has enzymatic properties (6) and a tissue localization (11–
12) compatible with it being responsible, at least partially, for
the degradation of intercellular parts of desmosomes, a process
that is a prerequisite for desquamation.
There is also evidence, however, suggesting that other pro-
teases than SCCE, possibly with trypsin-like primary sub-
strate specificity, are involved in desquamation. One such piece
of evidence is that SCCE is formed as an inactive precursor
with a seven-amino acid residue-long propeptide. The propep-
tide can be removed in vitro by means of tryptic cleavage of a
Lys–Ile bond, yielding proteolytically active SCCE (9). In the
stratum corneum, the SCCE precursor constitutes a significant
fraction of the total SCCE protein present.
2 This suggests that
SCCE activation catalyzed by an hitherto unknown trypsin-
like protease may play a regulatory role in desquamation.
In addition to SCCE activation, trypsin-like proteases may
also be involved directly in the degradation of intercellular
adhesive structures in the stratum corneum. By means of zy-
mography of extracts of stratum corneum, components with
caseinolytic activity with apparent molecular mass around 30
kDa can be detected in addition to SCCE. The 30-kDa pro-
tease(s) can be inhibited with leupeptin, but not by chymosta-
tin (7–8), suggesting a trypsin-like primary substrate specific-
ity. Suzuki et al. (13–15) have presented evidence that the
* This work was supported by Swedish Medical Research Council
Grant K98-12X-11206-04B, the Swedish Psoriasis Association, and the
Welander-Finsen Foundations. The costs of publication of this article
were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must
therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement” in accordance with 18
U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted
to the GenBank
TM/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AF168768.
‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed : Dept. of Public
Health and Clinical Medicine, Dermatology and Venereology, Univer-
sity Hospital, SE-901 85 Umeå, Sweden. Fax: 46 90 14 36 73; E-mail:
torbjorn.egelrud@dermven.umu.se.
1 The abbreviations used are: SCCE, stratum corneum chymotryptic
enzyme; SCTE, stratum corneum tryptic enzyme; PAGE, polyacryl-
amide gel electrophoresis; r-pro-SCTE, recombinant pro-SCTE;
r-SCTE, recombinant SCTE; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RT, re-
verse transcriptase; FPLC, fast protein liquid chromatography.
2 A. Lundstro ¨m and T. Egelrud, unpublished observation.
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY Vol. 274, No. 42, Issue of October 15, pp. 30033–30040, 1999
© 1999 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Printed in U.S.A.
This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org 30033
This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

--- PAGE 2 ---
spontaneous dissociation of corneocytes that can be induced in
stratum corneum samples is dependent upon the activity of
trypsin- as well as chymotrypsin-like enzymes, and they also
suggested that the trypsin-like protease involved was the 30-
kDa component detected on zymograms.
In order to further elucidate the mechanisms of stratum
corneum turnover and desquamation, we have in this work
purified the 30-kDa protease detectable by zymography of stra-
tum corneum extracts. The amino acid sequence data thus
obtained were used to carry out molecular cloning of a cDNA
representing a new, skin-derived serine protease that from the
deduced amino acid sequence is predicted to have a trypsin-like
primary substrate specificity. The enzyme is tentatively named
“stratum corneum tryptic enzyme” (SCTE).
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Plantar stratum corneum was collected as described previously (8).
Healthy human skin was obtained from plastic surgery and prepared as
described (9). HaCat-cells (a spontaneously immortalized human kera-
tinocyte line (16)) was a generous gift from Dr. N. E. Fusenig (Heidel-
berg, Germany). An epidermal cDNA
lgt11 library (source of mRNA
was keratinocytes from human adult foreskin) was obtained from
CLONTECH (Palo Alto, CA).
Purification of SCTE—In all purification steps, protease activity was
detected by means of zymography (17) after polyacrylamide gel electro-
phoresis in the presence of SDS in gels containing 1% heat-denatured
casein. Samples were diluted in electrophoresis sample buffer without
reducing agent and were not heated before application.
The same starting material as for the purification of SCCE (8) was
used, i.e. a KCl extract of plantar corneocytes that had undergone
spontaneous dissociation during incubation at 37 °C of plantar stratum
corneum in 0.1
M Tris-HCl, pH 8, 5 mM EDTA. Extracts corresponding
to 50 g of dried tissue, approximately 250 ml, were filtered through a
0.45-
mm Minisart N membrane (Sartorius, Go ¨ttingen, Germany) and
applied on a 3-ml Resource RPC reversed phase chromatography col-
umn (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) connected to FPLC equipment
(Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoro-
acetic acid. The column was eluted with a linear gradient consisting of
0–100% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in a total volume of 100
ml, flow rate 2 ml/min. Fractions containing SCTE and SCCE, which
eluted together at approximately 50% acetonitrile, were pooled (1–2
ml), diluted with 5 ml of 0.1
M sodium acetate, pH 5.0, and applied on
a 1-ml Resource S FPLC column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equil-
ibrated with 0.1
M sodium acetate, pH 5.0. The column was eluted with
a linear gradient consisting of 0–1 M NaCl in equilibrating buffer in a
total volume of 100 ml, flow rate 1 ml/min. SCTE-containing fractions
were pooled (4 ml) and again subjected to reversed phase chromatog-
raphy as above. The fraction (1 ml) containing peak SCTE activity was
lyophilized in portions and subjected to further purification by means of
electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gels containing SDS (SDS-PAGE)
(18) with and without reduction prior to electrophoresis. Separated
proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Im-
mobilon P, Millipore AB, Sundbyberg, Sweden) and stained with Coo-
massie Blue (Fig. 1). Bands were cut out, wetted in methanol, and
subjected to reduction and carbamylation with 8.5 mg/ml dithiothreitol
f o r2ha t6 0° C followed by 28 mg/ml sodium iodoacetate for 45 min at
room temperature, all in 6
M guanidinium hydrochloride, pH 8.5.3 The
membrane strips were then subjected to amino acid sequence analysis
(19) in a Procise 494 protein sequencing system (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA). Sequencing was performed with cycle programs
adapted to our reaction cartridges and chemicals from the
manufacturer.
Cloning and Sequencing of scte cDNA—Two degenerated oligomers,
rD1 and rD2, were designed from the amino acid sequence obtained for
the purified SCTE (Table I). DNA was extracted from the
lgt11 library
by phenol/chloroform extraction. A nested polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) was set up where
1⁄50 of the product from the first PCR reaction
was used as a template in the second round. PCR was performed
according to standard protocols using Taq DNA polymerase (Roche
Molecular Biochemicals). PCR 1 was run for 15 cycles, and PCR 2 was
run for 30 cycles. To amplify the cDNA encoding for the N-terminal part
of SCTE, the primer pair rD1-F1 (see Table I) was used followed by a
PCR using rD2-F2. The quality of the products were checked on agarose
gels before cloning into the pCR2.1 or pCRII vector, using the Original
TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen BV, Leek, The Netherlands) as recom-
mended by the manufacturer. Plasmid DNA was isolated using the
Qiagen QIAprep Spin Plasmid Kit (Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA). Nucleo-
tide sequencing was performed using the ABI Prism DNA sequencing
kit and an ABI377 automated DNA sequencer (Perkin-Elmer).
From the obtained nucleotide sequence, specific primers were de-
signed that were used in the subsequent cloning reactions by means of
which
lgt11 clones were obtained that covered the whole coding
sequence.
To verify the sequence, total RNA was extracted from HaCaT cells
and human epidermis with TRIzol (Life Technologies, Ta ¨by, Sweden) as
recommended by the manufacturer. Reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR
was performed according to standard protocols with oligo(dT) (Perkin-
Elmer) in the RT reaction andscte-specific primer pairs in the PCRs. To
obtain sequence down to the poly(A), the oligomers (dT)
17-Ad and Ad
(see Table I) were designed (20). The (dT)17-Ad was used to bind to long
stretches of adenosines in the RT reaction. In the following PCR, the Ad
primer binding to the end of the oligomer used in the RT reaction was
used in combination with the scte specific primer P4. Using the se-
quence information obtained, primer rP7 could be designed and used in
the subsequent PCRs to verify the 39-end sequence. Reversed tran-
scriptase and RNasin were purchased from Promega (Falkenberg, Swe-
den). Cloning and sequencing was performed as described above. In
order to detect and avoid PCR mismatches, all sequence analyses were
performed on at least three independently cloned products. Homology
searches were carried out with the Gapped Blast 2.0.6 On-net program
(National Center for Biotechnology Information), and prediction of the
signal cleavage site was performed with the SignalP Version 1.1 On-net
program (Expasy Tools, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis).
Northern Blot Analyses—Messenger RNA was recovered from total
RNA from HaCat cells using the Oligotex Midi kit (Qiagen) as recom-
mended by the manufacturer. Two
mg of mRNA was denaturated with
glyoxal and dimethyl sulfoxide and electrophoresed on a 1% agarose gel
in 10 m
M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7, followed by capillary transfer
to a positively charged nylon filter (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) in
103 SSC according to standard procedures (21). After UV cross-linking,
deglyoxylation was performed by washing the membrane in 20 m
M
Tris-HCl, pH 8, at 65 °C for 15 min. Prehybridization for 30 min and
hybridization overnight at 68 °C was performed in DIG Easy Hyb
solution (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). For this purpose, a scte-spe-
cific digoxygenin-labeled riboprobe, covering positions262 to 343 in the
scte cDNA nucleotide sequence (Fig. 2), was prepared with the DIG
RNA labeling kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). The membrane was
washed in 0.1 3 SSC with 0.1% SDS at 68 °C for 3 3 20 min before
detection reactions were performed as recommended (DIG wash and
Block Buffer Set and CDP-Star; Roche Molecular Biochemicals).
Antibodies—A polyclonal rabbit serum (antibody Br-1) and affinity-
purified polyclonal rabbit antibodies specific for pro-SCTE (antibody
Br-C10) and the catalytically active part of SCTE (antibody Br-B1) were
produced against bacterial fusion proteins from plasmid constructs that
were based on the nucleotide sequence shown in Fig. 2. The production
and characterization of these antibodies will be described in detail
elsewhere.
4 SCCE-specific antibodies (22) were obtained from Symbi-
com AB (Umeå, Sweden).
Expression and Purification of Recombinant Pro-SCTE—For expres-
sion of recombinant pro-SCTE (r-pro-SCTE) in mammalian cells, the
Semliki Forest Virus system (Life Technologies, Inc., Ta ¨by, Sweden)
was used as described (23). A PCR fragment corresponding to positions
2207 to 684 in the scte cDNA (Fig. 2) was amplified using the XbaI-
containing oligomers xP8 and rP9x (see Table I) with Pfu Taq polym-
erase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) as recommended. The fragment ob-
tained was ligated into the XbaI site of the pSFV1 vector (Life
Technologies, Inc.). Messenger RNA from the recombinant pSFV1 and
the pSFV-Helper 2 plasmids were in vitro transcribed and electropo-
rated into BHK-21 cells as described (22). Virus particles containing
recombinant SCTE cDNA were collected and used for infection of
CHO-K1 cells, cultured in DMEM/NUT.MIX F-12 W/Glutamax I (Life
Technologies, Inc.). For the subsequent purification, r-pro-SCTE was
detected by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with antiserum Br-1. Con-
ditioned culture medium (60–300 ml) was diluted with 1 volume of 0.05
M Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and subjected to ion exchange chromatography on
a 1-ml Resource S column eluted with 0–1M NaCl in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH
7.4, total volume 50 ml. r-pro-SCTE-containing fractions were pooled
3 J. Mozdzanowski, personal communication (to Dr. P.-I. Olsson).
4 E. Ekholm, M. Brattsand, and T. Egelrud, manuscript in
preparation.
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum30034

--- PAGE 3 ---
and further purified, either by reversed phase chromatography as
above, or by gel exclusion chromatography on two serially coupled
Superdex 75HR 10/30 columns (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equili-
brated with 0.1
M Tris-HCl, pH 7, 0.2 M NaCl. N-terminal amino acid
sequence analyses were performed as above on fractions from reversed
phase chromatography after lyophilization, SDS-PAGE, and transfer to
polyvinylidene difluoride membranes.
Biochemical Analyses—For activation of r-pro-SCTE, 250
mlo fa
fraction from gel exclusion chromatography was made 0.5 M in NaCl
and incubated at room temperature for 90 min with 25ml of sedimented
trypsin-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich, Stockholm; catalog no. T-4019). After
centrifugation, the supernatant was recovered and analyzed by zymog-
raphy as above and immunoblotting.
For glycosidase treatment r-pro-SCTE containing fractions from gel
exclusion chromatography or preparations of partially purified native
SCTE (see below) were dialyzed against 0.1
M acetic acid, lyophilized,
and treated with N-glycosidase F (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) ac-
cording to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Treated samples
were analyzed by immunoblotting.
Partially purified preparations of native SCTE used for glycosidase
treatment and comparative studies were prepared from plantar stra-
tum corneum. Ten g of tissue was ground in a mortar and mechanically
homogenized in 200 ml of 0.1
M Tris-HCl, pH 7. The suspension was left
at room temperature for 1 h, the insoluble material was recovered by
centrifuging, and the pellet was extracted with 40 ml of 1
M acetic acid.
The extract was cleared by centrifuging and filtration before being
either dialyzed against 0.01
M acetic acid and lyophilized in portions or
subjected to reversed phase chromatography as above. Fractions con-
taining SCTE, as detected by zymography and immunoblotting, were
further purified by gel exclusion chromatography as above in 0.2
M
acetic acid, 0.3 M NaCl.
Analyses of SCTE Expression in Human Tissues—cDNA was synthe-
sized from 1 mg of mRNA, recovered as described above, from human
skin using Ready to Go T-primed First Strand Kit (Amersham Phar-
macia Biotech). PCR was performed on cDNA from epidermis and
Human Multiple Tissue Panel I (CLONTECH), using the Advantage
cDNA Polymerase Mix (CLONTECH) as recommended. For scte, hu-
man scce and g3pdh primer pairs P4-rP7, S1-rS2, and G1-rG2 (Table I),
respectively, were used in the amplification reactions. Samples were
collected after 25, 30, and 35 PCR cycles, and the products were visu-
alized by EtBr staining after separation on 1% agarose gels.
RESULTS
Purification of Native Human SCTE— Electrophoretic anal-
yses of a preparation obtained after the three chromatogaphy
steps (reversed phase chromatography, cationic ion exchange
chromatography, and reversed phase chromatography) are
shown in Fig. 1. Zymography (Fig. 1A) in gels containing casein
showed one strong proteolytic band with apparent molecular
mass around 25 kDa and one weaker component with slightly
lower mobility. These two bands correspond to unglycosylated
and glycosylated SCCE, respectively (9). In addition, a zone of
proteolysis, apparently consisting of one stronger band with
molecular mass around 30 kDa, and two weaker bands, one
with slightly higher mobility and one with slightly lower mo-
bility than the major band, were seen. Coomassie staining of a
membrane with transferred proteins after SDS-PAGE is shown
in Fig. 1B. Samples that had not been reduced prior to electro-
phoresis (right part of Fig. 1 B) were found to contain two
groups of proteins with molecular mass apparently similar to
the two groups of proteolytic components seen on zymograms
with apparent molecular mass of about 30 and 25 kDa, respec-
tively. Samples that had been reduced prior to electrophoresis
contained several components: one group with apparent molec-
ular mass around 33 kDa, one group with molecular mass
around 30 kDa, and several components with lower molecular
mass. Immunblotting with SCCE-specific antibodies (not
shown) showed that the 25-kDa components (nonreduced sam-
ples), the 30-kDa components, and some of the smaller compo-
nents (reduced samples) were related to SCCE.
Amino acid sequence analyses of the Coomassie-stained com-
ponents were carried out on membrane strips as outlined in
Fig. 1B, and the results are summarized in Table II. Strips
from samples that had not been reduced prior to electrophore-
sis yielded two N-terminal amino acid sequences. Strips taken
from the middle portion and strips taken from the edges of the
diffuse 30-kDa band gave identical amino acid sequences. The
TABLE I
Oligomer primers used in PCR and RT-PCR
The degenerated oligomers rD1 and rD2 were based on amino acid sequence data shown in Table II. All other oligomers derived from scte were
based on nucleotide sequence data obtained in the preceding reactions. scte nucleotide positions were derived from the nucleotide sequence shown
in Fig. 2, lgt11 sequences from the Lambda Library Protocol Handbook (PT1010–1), scce sequences from Hansson et al. (9), and g3pdh sequences
from the Multiple Tissue cDNA Panels User Manual (PT3158–1).
Oligomer designation Derived from Position Sequence, 59 to 39
F1 lgt11 1033–1054 GGT GGC GAC GAC TCC TGG AGC C
F2 lgt11 1048–1068 TGG AGC CCG TCA GTA TCG GCG
R1 lgt11 1117–1096 TTG ACA CCA GAC CAA CTG GTA ATG
R2 lgt11 1096–1076 GGT AGC GAC CGG CGC TCA GCT
rD1 scte 41–22 (A/G/C/T)(A/G/C/T)(A/G/C/T) GG(C/T) TG(A/G/C/T) GT(A/G/C/T) GCC AT(A/G) TC
rD2 scte 36–16 (T/C)TG (A/C/G/T)GT (A/C/G/T)GC CAT (A/G)TC (A/G)CA (A/G)TC
P1 scte 2366 to
2345
GTG TCT GTG CGT CCT GCA CCC A
P2 scte 262 to 241 GCA ACC AGG ACC TGG GAG CTG
P3 scte 216 to 6 TGA CAG CAG CAG CCG CAT CAT C
P4 scte 321–343 CGT CTC CTC TCA TTG TCC CTC TG
rP4 scte 343–321 CAG AGG GAC AAT GAG AGG AGA CG
P5 scte 596–616 CTT GTG CCC GGC CCA ACA GAC
P6 scte 620–642 GTG TCT ACA CGA ACC TCT GCA AG
rP7 scte 1010–986 CCA CTT CTC AGT TTA TTT CTG GGA C
xP8a scte 2208 to
2187
TCC CCC CGG GTG CAG CGG CCA TGG CTA CAG CA
rP9xa scte 684–661 TCC CCC CGG GTC AGG AGT TGG CCT GGA TGG TTT C
(dT)17-Adb GGG CGA CTC GAG TCG ACA TCG ATT TTT TTT TTT TTT TTT
Ad GGG CGA CTC GAG TCG ACA TCG A
S1 scce 105–128 ATT ATT GAT GGC GCC CCA TGT GCA
rS2 scce 749–726 CCA CTT GGT GAA CTT GCA CAC TTG
G1 g3pdh 71–96 TGA AGG TCG GTG TGA ACG GAT TTG GC
rG2 g3pdh 1053–1030 CAT GTA GGC CAT GAG GTC CAC CAC
a The xP8 and rP9x primers contain an extra XmaI site sequence in their 59-ends.
b Ad is composed of a sequence of nucleotides with low probability to be found in any living organism. The (dT) 17 is designed to bind to a long
stretch of A nucleotides, i.e. polyA. When used in the RT reaction, the (dT) 17-Ad will bind to polyA, with the Ad part giving an end to the cDNA
that in the following PCR can be amplified using the homologous Ad PCR primer (20).
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum 30035

--- PAGE 4 ---
major sequence in nonreduced samples was identical with the
only sequence that could be found in strips from reduced sam-
ples. The minor sequence in nonreduced samples could later be
identified as part of the amino acid sequence for SCTE deduced
from its cDNA (see below).
Amino acid sequence analyses were carried out on three
independent preparations all with identical results as regards
the five N-terminal amino acid residues in reduced samples,i.e.
Ile-Ile-Gly-Gly-Ser-Asp (see below on the difference between
amino acid and nucleotide sequence data for residue 3). Homol-
ogy searches based on the major amino acid sequence obtained
strongly suggested that the sequence was derived from the N
terminus of the catalytically active part of a serine protease.
Cloning of scte cDNA—PCR was carried out on DNA ex-
tracted from the keratinocyte library with primer pairs consist-
ing of one primer derived from the bacteriophage
l sequence
and one degenerated primer derived from the N-terminal
amino acid sequence of the purified protein. PCR products with
nucleotide sequences encoding the expected amino acid se-
quences were used to design new primers, which were used in
new PCRs. The information obtained from the keratinocyte
library was subsequently used to set up RT-PCR reactions with
RNA prepared from HaCat cells and human epidermis. In this
way, the nucleotide sequence of an apparently close to full-
length cDNA, shown for HaCat cells in Fig. 2, could be ob-
tained. With the exception of a part of the noncoding 3 9-end,
which was not found in the
lgt 11 library, the nucleotide
sequence shown in Fig. 2 was verified for overlapping PCR
products from HaCat cells, human skin, and a commercially
available keratinocyte library (see legend to Fig. 2 for position
2212).
The cDNA contained an open reading frame encoding 293
amino acid residues. The deduced amino acid sequence con-
tained one part that was identical to the N-terminal amino acid
sequence of reduced samples of the purified SCTE, with the
exception of residue 3, which was deduced to be N instead of G
in the purified protein. In addition, the second amino acid
sequence found in nonreduced samples of purified SCTE could
be identified (positions 62–80 in the deduced sequence).
As shown in Fig. 2, we propose that the protein encoded by
the scte cDNA consists of a 29-amino acid residue-long signal
peptide, a 37-amino acid residue-long propeptide, and a 227-
amino acid-long catalytically active enzyme protein. The
propeptide contains one single cysteine residue. The deduced
amino acid sequence of the active enzyme contains the con-
FIG.2 . The nucleotide sequence of scte derived from the hu-
man keratinocyte line HaCaT and the predicted amino acid
sequence of an SCTE preproprotein . The methionine at position
266 in the amino acid sequence is the suggested start of the signal
sequence. The proposed cleavage site of the signal peptide is at alanine
237. Underlinings in the amino acid sequence show the conserved
sequences of the catalytic triad of serine proteases. Italics in the amino
acid sequence denote the proposed propeptide of SCTE. Boldface letters
in the amino acid sequence show amino acid residues consistent with
amino acid sequence data for purified SCTE. Theunderlined nucleotide
c at position 2212 in the nucleotide sequence is in the
lgt11 cDNA
clones exchanged for an a. The underlining at positions 994–999 in the
nucleotide sequence denotes a proposed polyadenylation site.
TABLE II
Results of amino acid sequence analyses for purified SCTE
The numbering of strips refers to Fig. 1 B. In strips 2 and 4, the
amounts of derivatives detected were of the same order in each step.
The separation into two sequences was based on the combined results
for strips 1 and 3. “A/H” in strips 1 and 3 denotes uncertainty whether
the detected amino acid was alanine or histidine.
Strip Amino acid sequence
1 IIGGSDCDM(A/H)TQPWQ
2 IIGGSDXDMHTQ
ESGQQMFQGVKS
3 IIGGSDCDM(A/H)TQPWEAALLL
a
ESGQQMFQGVKSIP(A/H)PGYSb
4 IIGGSDXDMHTQ
ESGQQMFQGKS
a Major sequence.
b Minor sequence.
FIG.1 . Electrophoretic analyses of a preparation of partially
purified SCTE obtained by three consecutive chromatography
steps as described under “Experimental Procedures .” A, zymog-
raphy showing the proteolytic activity of SCTE as well as SCCE in an
SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing casein. B, protein bands on a poly-
vinylidene difluoride membrane visualized by Coomassie Blue staining.
The proteins were separated by electrophoresis under reducing and
nonreducing conditions, respectively. The indicated bands, numbered
1–4, were cut out and analyzed by amino acid sequencing (see Table II).
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum30036

--- PAGE 5 ---
served sequences of the catalytic triad of serine proteases (23)
(underlined in Fig. 2) and four potential N-glycosylation sites
(residues 3, 107, 142, and 186). The aspartate at position 173
corresponds to the bottom of the primary substrate specificity
pouch in serine proteases (24) and is compatible with a trypsin-
like primary substrate specificity. The molecular mass calcu-
lated from the amino acid sequence of the active enzyme is 25.2
kDa. The observed apparent molecular mass (about 33 kDa) of
the purified protein suggests posttranslational modifications,
most likely glycosylation, of the mature protein (see below).
Homology searches, protein as well as DNA, yielded high
scores for a large number of serine proteases. The five proteins
showing the highest amino acid sequence homologies are
shown in Table III. Among these proteins are porcine enamel
matrix serine protease, human and murine neuropsin, and
human SCCE. No significant homologies were found when
searches were performed for the amino acid sequence of the
proposed propeptide.
Northern blot analysis of mRNA from HaCat cells with a
riboprobe derived from the scte cDNA showed one strong hy-
bridization signal corresponding to a size of the mRNA of 1.6
kilobases (Fig. 3). Due to very weak signals, results from anal-
yses of mRNA prepared from human skin were not conclusive,
but they were suggestive of an mRNA with the same size as in
HaCat cells (results not shown).
Comparison of Native and Recombinant SCTE—Polyclonal
rabbit antibodies were prepared against bacterial fusion pro-
teins with polypeptides corresponding to pro-SCTE (antibody
Br-C10) and active SCTE (antibody Br-1). On immunoblots of
crude extracts of plantar stratum corneum (reduced samples),
antibody Br-B1 labeled three groups of proteins: one group
with molecular mass of about 37 kDa, proposed to be pro-SCTE;
one group with molecular mass of about 33 kDa, suggested to
correspond to catalytically active SCTE; and one group with
molecular mass of about 25 kDa, suggested to be derived from
proteolytically modified SCTE (Fig. 4A, lane 1). In samples that
had been N-glycosidase-treated, there was a shift toward in-
creased electrophoretic mobility of all labeled components, and
the detected bands had a sharper appearance (Fig. 4A, lane 2).
Br-C10 labeled only the 37-kDa component (proposed to be
pro-SCTE; Fig. 4B, lane 1), which also showed a decrease in
apparent molecular mass after deglycosylation (Fig. 4B, lane
2). An immunoblot of a glycosidase-treated sample labeled with
SCCE-specific antibodies is shown for comparison (Fig. 4 C,
lane 1). All components labeled by the two SCTE-specific anti-
bodies co-chromatographed on reversed phase chromatogra-
phy. On gel exclusion chromatography, there was a partial
separation of the 37- and 33-kDa components, whereas the 33-
and 25-kDa components and the 30-kDa proteolytic activity
revealed by zymography appeared to co-elute (chromatography
results not shown).
Conditioned media from CHO-K1 cells transfected with scte
cDNA (but not media from untransfected cells) contained com-
ponents with apparent molecular mass of about 40 kDa that
were labeled by the SCTE-specific antibodies on immunoblots.
The amounts expressed were quite low but still sufficient to
yield material for analyses. Purified material contained one
detectable N-terminal amino acid sequence, which was found to
be Asn-Asn-Asp-Val-Ser-Cys, in agreement with the predicted
signal cleavage site (see Fig. 2). When compared with the
proposed native pro-SCTE ( i.e. the component that could be
detected on immunoblots with antibody Br-C10) the recombi-
nant protein had a molecular mass that was around 3 kDa
higher. This difference in molecular mass seemed to be due to
differences in carbohydrate contents, since it disappeared after
deglycosylation (Fig. 5). As for the native protein, the apparent
heterogeneity of the recombinant protein seen on immunoblots
was abolished by N-glycosidase treatment.
By trypsin treatment, it was possible to convert r-pro-SCTE
to an active protease with apparent molecular mass of about
31–35 kDa, as revealed by zymography (Fig. 6). In the same
way as was found for native SCTE, the proteolytic activity of
recombinant SCTE (r-SCTE) was separated on zymograms into
several components that differed slightly in electrophoretic
mobility. As compared with native SCTE, r-SCTE had a higher
apparent molecular mass (approximately 31–35 kDa versus
approximately 28–33 kDa; unreduced samples). Immunoblot
analyses of trypsin-treated r-pro-SCTE, as compared with a
preparation containing native SCTE and pro-SCTE, are shown
in Fig. 7. Trypsin treatment lead to a decrease in apparent
molecular mass from about 40 to 35 kDa (reduced samples) of
the components detected by antibody Br-B1 (specific for the
catalytically active part of SCTE; Fig. 7 A, lanes 2 and 3). The
FIG.3 . Northern blot analysis with an scte-specific riboprobe
of mRNA prepared from HaCat cells.
TABLE III
The five proteins showing the highest degree of homology to SCTE
A summary of the BLAST search based on the deduced amino acid sequence of catalytically active SCTE (amino acid residues 1–227 in Fig. 2)
is shown.
Sequences producing significant alignments Score E value Identities Positives
bits
gi?2737921 (U76256) enamel matrix serine proteinase 1 precursor. . . 258 3e–68 125/227 (55%) 158/227 (69%)
gnl?PID?dl034370 (AB012917) serine protease (TLSP) (Homo sapiens) 252 1e–66 117/231 (50%) 158/231 (67%)
gnl?PID?dl029613 (AB009849) neuropsin [H. sapiens] 246 1e–64 112/226 (49%) 151/226 (66%)
pir?I56559 neuropsin-mouse .gi 1020C91?gnl?PID?d1007022 (D30. . . 242 1e–63 108/226 (47%) 152/226 (66%)
gnl?PID?e1319201 (AJ005641) serine protease [Rattus rattus] 241 3e–63 108/226 (47%) 152/226 (66%)
sp?P49862?SCCE HUMAN STRATUM CORNEUM CHYMOTRYPTIC ENZYME PRECUR. . . 233 6e–61 109/225 (48%) 149/225 (65%)
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum 30037

--- PAGE 6 ---
difference in molecular mass of around 2–3 kDa between native
SCTE and r-SCTE, as suggested by zymography, could be dem-
onstrated also by immunoblot analyses (cf. Fig. 7A,lanes 1 and
3). As expected, trypsin-treated r-pro-SCTE was not labeled by
antibody Br-C10 (specific for pro-SCTE; Fig. 7 B, lane 3).
Expression of scte in Human Tissues— Results from expres-
sion studies of scte in comparison with scce by means of PCR on
cDNA derived from human skin and a commercially available
panel of cDNA from a number of human tissues are shown in
Fig. 8 and Table IV. Semiquantitative information was ob-
tained by means of comparing the intensities of the PCR prod-
ucts on agarose gels as a function of the number of PCR cycles
run. After 25 cycles, visible products were obtained from skin
only. With an increasing number of PCR cycles, products could
be detected also in other tissues, especially brain, placenta, and
kidney. Evidence of expression in lung was found for scce but
not for scte.
DISCUSSION
In this work, we present the nucleotide sequence for a cDNA
encoding a new human serine protease. The sequence was
obtained by means of PCR cloning from a keratinocyte library,
from HaCat cells, and from normal human skin with degener-
ated primers based on amino acid sequence data for a protein
purified from human plantar stratum corneum. The cDNA
from all three sources had open reading frames with identical
nucleotide sequences. The protein was purified from three dif-
ferent batches of pooled starting material. The amino acid
sequence deduced from the cDNA contained two stretches, 20
and 19 residues long, respectively, which could be identified by
amino acid sequence analyses of the purified protein. This is
with the exception of residue 3 in the purified protein, which in
all preparations analyzed was found to be a glycine, while all
preparations (from three different sources) of cDNA encoded an
asparagine at this position. At present, we have no explanation
for this aberration (see below). On the basis of comparisons of
amino acid sequence data for purified proteins and the amino
acid sequence deduced from cDNA, we consider it very un-
likely, however, that we cloned the “wrong” cDNA. The purified
protein had an apparent molecular mass and a distribution
pattern on Coomassie-stained membranes that was similar to a
group of components with proteolytic activity that could be
detected in the purified preparation on zymograms with casein
as substrate. This group of proteolytic components with appar-
ent molecular mass of about 30 kDa is one of two groups of
major proteolytic enzymes that can be detected on zymograms
after SDS-PAGE of crude extracts of human plantar and non-
palmar-plantar stratum corneum (6, 7, 13). The other group,
with apparent molecular mass of about 25 kDa, is SCCE.
Taken together, these facts strongly suggest that we have
cloned the cDNA for the 30-kDa serine protease of human
stratum corneum with trypsin-like substrate specificity and
FIG.7 . Effect of trypsin treatment on r-pro-SCTE. A, primary
antibody was Br-B1 (detecting pro-SCTE plus SCTE); B, primary anti-
body was Br-C10 (detecting pro-SCTE). Secondary antibodies were
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-IgG, detected by ECL1
(Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Lane 1, partially purified pro-SCTE,
SCTE, and proteolytically modified SCTE from plantar stratum cor-
neum; lane 2, r-pro-SCTE; lane 3, trypsin-treated r-pro-SCTE. Markers
are as in Fig. 5. The arrows in A indicate the difference in mobility
between SCTE from plantar stratum corneum ( lane 1) and trypsin-
treated r-pro-SCTE (lane 3).
FIG.4 . SCTE, pro-SCTE, and SCCE in plantar stratum cor-
neum: Effect of N-glycosidase treatment. Immunoblots of reduced
samples prepared from a crude extract in acetic acid (see “Experimental
Procedures”). Primary antibodies were Br-B1 (suggested specificity for
catalytically active part of SCTE) (A), Br-C10 (suggested specificity for
pro-SCTE) (B), and anti-SCCE (C). Secondary antibodies were alkaline
phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (DAKOPATTS, A ¨ lvsjo¨,
Sweden) and were detected as described (28). Untreated reduced sam-
ples are shown in lane 1, A and B. Glycosidase treatment had been
performed on samples in lane 2, A and B, and in lane 1, C. Prestained
molecular mass markers were from Bio-Rad (Sundbyberg, Sweden).
FIG.5 . Comparison of native pro-SCTE and r-pro-SCTE: Effect
of N-glycosidase treatment. An immunoblot (reduced samples) was
labeled with antibody Br-C10. Secondary antibodies and detection are
as in Fig. 4; prestained markers are from same source as in Fig. 4 but
a new batch. Lanes 1 and 2, samples partially purified from plantar
stratum corneum as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Lane
3, r-pro-SCTE. Asterisks indicate samples as in lanes 1–3, treated with
N-glycosidase.
FIG.6 . Comparison of native SCTE and r-SCTE by zymogra-
phy in polyacrylamide gels containing casein. Lane 1, partially
purified sample from plantar stratum corneum; lane 2, r-pro-SCTE
treated with insolubilized trypsin;lane 3, untreated r-pro-SCTE;lane 4,
control sample with insolubilized trypsin incubated in buffer only. t,
trypsin released from the trypsin-agarose gel.
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum30038

--- PAGE 7 ---
with a proposed function in desquamation (13).
The calculated molecular mass for SCTE, based on the de-
duced amino acid sequence, is 25.2 kDa. This, in combination
with an apparent molecular mass of the purified protein of
about 30 kDa without reduction and about 33 kDa after reduc-
tion, the appearance of multiple bands with the same detecta-
ble N-terminal amino acid sequences after electrophoresis, the
appearance of a group of several proteolytically active compo-
nents on zymograms, and the results from deglycosylation ex-
periments suggest that SCTE is a glycoprotein. In accordance
with this, the deduced amino acid sequence contains several
possible N-glycosylation sites, all of which are found in the part
of the encoded protein corresponding to the catalytically active
part of the enzyme.
The fact that two N-terminal amino acid sequences could be
detected in nonreduced but not in reduced purified SCTE pro-
tein indicates that the enzyme had been modified by proteolytic
modification, either in vivo or during the purification proce-
dure. The tyrosine residue (Tyr-61) immediately before the
N-terminal glutamate of the internal sequence is compatible
with a proteolysis catalyzed by the chymotrypsin-like SCCE
(10).
The deduced amino acid sequence of SCTE is proposed to
contain a 29-amino acid residue-long signal peptide, followed
by a 37-amino acid residue-long propeptide and a 227-amino
acid residue-long protein constituting the active enzyme. The
proposed sequence for the active enzyme contains the three
conserved sequences of the catalytical triad (histidine 41, as-
partate 87, and serine 179; see Fig. 2) typical of serine pro-
teases of the chymotrypsin family (24). The position localized
six amino acids N-terminal (position 173) of the active serine is
occupied by an aspartate residue, suggesting that the enzyme
may have a trypsin-like primary substrate specificity (25). The
propeptide ends with an arginine, suggesting that it can be
removed and the enzyme activated by means of tryptic
cleavage.
The proposed active enzyme contains 12 cystein residues,
whereas the proposed propeptide contains one single cystein
residue. The fact that no N-terminal amino acids that could be
attributed to the propeptide could be detected in nonreduced
purified SCTE-protein suggests that the propeptide is not co-
valently linked by an S–S bond to the activated enzyme pro-
tein. Thus, on the basis of knowledge about other serine pro-
teases of the chymotrypsin family, the active SCTE is likely to
contain six S–S bonds, and the propeptide is likely to contain
one free sulfhydryl group. At present, the functional implica-
tion of this is not known.
Mammalian cells transfected with scte-cDNA expressed a
protein with an N-terminal amino acid sequence identical with
the proposed sequence of pro-SCTE that could be converted to
an active protease by trypsin treatment. The recombinant pro-
SCTE as well as the catalytically active recombinant SCTE had
apparent molecular masses that were higher than their coun-
terparts in plantar stratum corneum. A likely explanation for
these differences, which was supported by results from degly-
cosylation experiments, may be that recombinant pro-SCTE is
more heavily glycosylated than native SCTE. The asparagine
in the sequence Ile-Ile-Asn-Gly-Ser-Asp-Cys (positions 1–7 in
the deduced SCTE amino acid sequence) constitutes a N-glyco-
sylation site not found in the N-terminal amino acid sequence
of native SCTE (Ile-Ile-Gly-Gly-Ser-Asp-Cys). The conflict be-
tween the amino acid sequence data for native SCTE and the
amino acid sequence deduced from scte-cDNA may thus be real
and of relevance. As stated above, we cannot resolve this prob-
lem at present.
Previous studies have shown that high expression of SCCE is
found in the skin only (9). On the protein level, this enzyme has
so far been detected only in squamous eptithelia undergoing
cornification (11, 22, 26, 27). This is compatible with the pro-
posed function of SCCE in desquamation. In the present work,
we found that expression of SCTE may be at least as skin-
specific as the expression of SCCE. The function of SCTE in the
skin is not known. It remains to be elucidated whether it is
involved in desquamation, as has been suggested (13–15). Most
likely, being a protease with trypsin-like substrate specificity,
SCTE is a possible candidate for being responsible for activa-
tion of zymogens such as pro-SCCE. The results presented in
this work lay the ground for future search of answers to these
questions.
FIG.8 . Expression studies by RT-PCR (human skin) and PCR
(other human tissues) of scte (I), scce (II), and g3pdh (III). EtBr-
stained agarose gels are shown. The number of PCR cycles was 30 in I
and II and 25 in III. Lanes 1–10, skin, heart, brain, placenta, lung, liver,
skeletal muscle, kidney, pancreas, and negative control (no cDNA in
PCR mixture), respectively.
TABLE IV
Expression studies by RT-PCR (human skin) and PCR (other human
tissues) of scte and scce
Shown is a summary of results after different numbers of PCR cycles.
The staining intensities were estimated visually with the products
obtained for scte and scce as references, arbitrarily set as 1, 11, and
111 after 25, 30, and 35 PCR cycles, respectively. In the negative
control, no cDNA was added to the reaction mixtures.
Tissue
scte PCR cycles scce PCR cycles
25 30 35 25 30 35
Skin 11 11 1 111 11 1 1
Heart 22 (1) 22 1
Brain 22 1 22 1
Placenta 22 1 2 (1) 1
Lung 22 2 2 (1) 11
Liver 22 2 2 (1) 2
Skeletal muscle 22 2 22 2
Kidney 2 (1) 1 2 1 111
Pancreas 22 (1) 22 (1)
Negative control 22 2 22 2
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum 30039

--- PAGE 8 ---
Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. Erik Johansson (Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics) for valuable discussions concern-
ing design of degenerated primers, and Bo Albinsson (Department of
Virology) for fast deliveries of oligomers. We thank Dr. Sergei Lobov
and Prof. Tor Ny (Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics)
for valuable help with the Semliki Forest virus system. The technical
assistance of Bo Glas and Astrid Lundgren is gratefully acknowledged.
We also thank Dr. P-I. Olsson (Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics) for carrying out the amino acid sequence analyses and
Siv Sa¨a¨f, (Department of Microbiology) for DNA sequencing.
Note Added in Proof —After submission of this paper, we have be-
come aware of a reported genomic DNA sequence (accession number
AF135028) which has combined exon sequences 100% homologous with
our cDNA sequence.
REFERENCES
1. Lundstro ¨m, A., and Egelrud, T. (1990) J. Invest. Dermatol. 94, 216–220
2. Chapman, S. J., and Walsh, A. (1990) Arch. Dermatol. Res. 282, 304–310
3. Egelrud, T., and Lundstro ¨m, A. (1989) Acta Dermato-Venereol. 69, 470–476
4. Lundstro ¨m, A., and Egelrud, T. (1988) J. Invest. Dermatol. 91, 340–343
5. Egelrud, T., and Lundstro ¨m, A. (1990) J. Invest. Dermatol. 95, 456–459
6. Egelrud, T., and Lundstro ¨m, A. (1991) Arch. Dermatol. Res. 283, 108–112
7. Lundstro ¨m, A., and Egelrud, T. (1991) Acta Dermato-Venereol. 71, 471–474
8. Egelrud, T. (1993) J. Invest. Dermatol. 101, 200–204
9. Hansson, L., Stro ¨mqvist, M., Ba ¨ckman, A., Wallbrandt, P., Carlstein, A., and
Egelrud, T. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 19420–19426
10. Skytt, A., Stro ¨mqvist, M., and Egelrud, T. (1995) Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 211, 586–589
11. Sondell, B., Thornell, L. E., Stigbrand, T., and Egelrud, T. (1994)J. Histochem.
Cytochem. 42, 459–465
12. Sondell, B., Thornell, L. E., and Egelrud, T. (1995) J. Invest. Dermatol. 104,
819–823
13. Suzuki, Y., Nomura, J., Hori, J., Koyama, J., Takahashi, M., and Horii, I.
(1993) Arch. Dermatol. Res. 285, 372–377
14. Suzuki, Y., Nomura, J., Koyama, J., and Horii, I. (1994) Arch. Dermatol. Res.
286, 249–253
15. Suzuki, Y., Koyama, J., Moro, O., Horii, I., Kikuchi, K., and Tanida, M. (1996)
Br. J. Dermatol. 134, 460–464
16. Boukamp, P., Petrussevska, R. T., Breitkreutz, D., Hornung, J., Markham, A.,
and Fusenig, N. E. (1988) J. Cell Biol. 106, 761–771
17. Horie, H., Fukoyama, K., Ito, Y., and Epstein, W. L. (1984) Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. 77B, 349–354
18. Laemmli, U. K. (1970) Nature 227, 680–685
19. Matsudaira, P. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 10035–10038
20. Frohman, M. A., Dush, M. K., and Martin, G. R. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
85, 8998–9002
21. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: A
Laboratory Manual, 2nd Ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY
22. Sondell, B., Dyberg, P., Anneroth, G. K. B., O ¨ stman, P.-O., and Egelrud T.
(1996) Acta Dermato-Venereol. 76, 177–181
23. Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D., Seidman, J. G., Smith,
J. A., and Struhl, K. (1995) Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, Vol. 2,
p. 16.20 Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston
24. Rawlings, N. D., and Barret, A. J. (1994) Methods Enzymol. 244, 19–61
25. Polga ´r L. (1987) in Neuberger, A., Brocklehurst, K. (eds)Hydrolytic Enzymes:
New Comprehensive Biochemistry , Vol. 16, pp. 159–200, Elsevier Science
Publishers B.V., Amsterdam
26. Ekholm, E., and Egelrud, T (1998) Br. J. Dermatol. 139, 585–590
27. Ekholm, E., Sondell, B., Dyberg, P., Jonsson, M., and Egelrud, T. (1998) Acta
Dermato-Venereol. 78, 343–347
Trypsin-like Serine Protease from Human Stratum Corneum30040