--- PAGE 1 ---
4. Mol. Biol. (1984) 180, 301-329 
Structure of Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor 
Results of Joint Neutron and X-ray Refinement of Crystal Form II 
ALEXANDER WLODAWER 
Center for Materials Science 
National Bureau of Standards 
Gaithersburg, Md 20899, U.S.A. 
and 
Laboratory of Molecular Biology 
National Institute of Arthritis, Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 
National Institutes of Health 
Bethesda, Md 20205, U.S.A. 
JOCHEN WALTER, ROBERT I-IUBER 
Max- Planc]c- Institut fiir Biochemie 
8033 Martinsried, F.R.G. 
AND 
LENNART SJOLIN 
Department of Inorganic Chemistry 
Chalmers Institute of Technology 
GSteborg, Sweden 
(Received 17 April 1984, and in revised form 26 June 1984) 
The structure of form II crystals of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor has been 
investigated by joint refinement of X-ray and neutron data. Crystallographic R 
factors for the final model were 0.200 for the X-ray data extending to 1 A 
resolution and 0-197 for the 1.8A neutron data. This model was strongly 
restrained, with 0.020 A root-mean-square (r.m.s.) departure of bond lengths from 
their ideal values and 0.019 A r.m.s, departure of planar groups from planarity. 
The resulting structure was very similar to that of crystal form I (r.m.s. deviation 
for main chain atoms was 0-40 A); nevertheless larger deviations were observed in 
particular regions of the chain. Twenty out of 63 ordered water molecules occupy 
similar positions (deviation less than 1 A) in both models. Eleven amide 
hydrogens were found to be protected from exchange after three months of 
soaking the crystals in deuterated mother liquor at pH 8-2. Their locations were 
in excellent agreement with the results obtained by two-dimensional nuclear 
magnetic resonance, but the rates of exchange are much lower in the crystalline 
state. 
301 0022-2836/84/340301-29 $03.00/0 © 1984 Academic Press Inc. (London) Ltd 


--- PAGE 2 ---
302 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
1. Introduction 
Bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor is one of the most extensively studied 
proteins. Its three-dimensional structure has been determined for the crystals of 
form I (Huber et al., 1970) using X-ray data extending to 2.5 A resolution and 
multiple isomorphous replacement. The structure was subsequently refined 
(Deisenhofer & Steigemann, 1975) using data extending to 1.5 A and a real-space 
procedure of Diamond (1971). The availability of a highly refined structure for 
this small protein (only 58 amino acids) led to its utilization in a large variety of 
experiments. The internal motions in BPTI t have been studied extensively by 
nuclear magnetic resonance techniques (for a review, see Wagner, 1983). BPTI 
provided an invaluable model in the development of two-dimensional nuclear 
magnetic resonance as a technique capable of providing three-dimensional 
information about the protein without a reference to the crystal structure 
(Wiithrich et al., 1982). Amide hydrogen exchange has been studied extensively 
(Nagayama & Wfithrich, 1982; Wagner & Wfithrich, 1982; for a review, see 
Englander & Kallenbach, 1983). BPTI was the first protein for which detailed 
experimental information about the folding of the polypeptide chain became 
available (for a review, see Baldwin, 1978). Computer simulations of internal 
protein dynamics have been developed using BPTI as a model (Levitt, 1981,1983; 
Brooks & Karplus, 1983). The methods of structure prediction based on the amino 
acid sequence were also applied first to BPTI (Tanaka & Scheraga, 1975; 
Levitt & Warshel, 1975). The need for a well-refined, high-resolution structure of 
BPTI is clear. 
The limits of resolution of the protein structures studied by diffraction methods 
are usually dictated by the quality of available crystals. Few proteins are capable 
of providing measurable diffraction data beyond 1 A resolution. Teeter & 
Hendrickson (1979) reported that reflections corresponding to plane spacings as 
close as 0.79 A have been observed during preliminary investigations of crystals of 
a small plant protein, crambin. The structure of this protein has been refined 
recently using X-ray data extending to 0.945 A resolution (Hendrickson, personal 
communication). Another protein refined with X-ray data extending to beyond 
1 A resolution was avian pancreatic polypeptide (Glover et al., 1983). Both of 
these proteins are smaller than BPTI. The limits of diffraction of form I crystals 
of BPTI were not unusually high and only when a new crystal form (form II) was 
found (Walter & Huber, 1983) did it become possible to measure X-ray data to 
resolutions exceeding 1 A. The rationale of studying this new crystal form was to 
obtain the most detailed structure, as well as to compare the structure of this very 
well-characterized protein in the two crystal forms and thus to correlate the 
changes in the structure with molecular packing. 
Neutron diffraction has been shown to provide additional information about 
protein structure not easily obtained from X-ray diffraction studies (for a review, 
see Wlodawer, 1982). This technique is particularly sensitive in locating hydrogen 
atoms, since their scattering lengths are of the order of those for carbon, oxygen 
Abbreviations used: BPTI, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor; PEG, polyethylene glycol; n.m.r., 
nuclear magnetic resonance; r.m.s., root-mean-square. 


--- PAGE 3 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 303 
and nitrogen. Neutron diffraction has been applied successfully in the studies of 
myoglobin (Hanson & Schoenborn, 1981; Phillips & Schoenborn, 1981), trypsin 
(Kossiakoff & Spencer, 1981), ribonuclease A (Wlodawer & SjSlin, 1983), lysozyme 
(Bentley & Mason, 1981) and crambin (Teeter & Kossiakoff, 1984). This technique 
was found to be very powerful in the investigations of the process of hydrogen 
exchange in crystals (Wlodawer & SjSlin, 1982; Kossiakoff, 1982; Bentley et al., 
1983). Wlodawer & Hendrickson (1982) have shown that simultaneous refinement 
with X-ray and neutron data works well and that it can provide more information 
about protein structure than refinement using either type of data alone. Large 
protein crystals are needed for the measurement of high-quality neutron 
diffraction data, but the crystals of form II of BPTI can be grown quite large, 
making such experiments feasible. This protein provides, indeed, a system of 
choice for neutron diffraction studies, in view of the availability of a large amount 
of data on hydrogen exchange collected using other techniques. We expected to be 
able to correlate diffraction results with those obtained by other methods, in 
particular n.m.r. 
For the reasons discussed above, we began the study of form II crystals of 
BPTI by a combination of X-ray and neutron diffraction, using the data 
extending to the highest measurable resolution that could be obtained with the 
instruments available. 
2. Materials and Methods 
(a) Crystal growth and treatment 
Crystals of form II of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor used for X-ray experiments 
were grown as described previously (Walter & Huber, 1983). They belong to the space 
group P212121, a = 74.1A, b = 23.4A, c = 28.9A. Large crystals used for neutron 
experiments were grown by a slight modification of that procedure. Lyophilized protein 
was dissolved in water at a concentration of 100 mg/ml. Sodium azide (0-02%, w/v) was 
added to inhibit bacterial growth. Separately~ a solution of 0-5 M-K2HPO 4 was made, with 
pH adjusted to 9"5. Crystallization solution was prepared by mixing 100 #1 of protein 
solution with 40 ~1 of the buffer and it was placed in a depression slide inside a plastic 
sandwich box filled with 15 ml of the buffer. The mixture was allowed to equilibrate by 
vapor diffusion for 4 days, after which a seed crystal was added. The seed crystal was first 
washed for 30 s in buffer solution in which it just starts to dissolve. It was then transferred 
to the equilibrated protein solution and was left undisturbed for 2 months. The crystal 
used for neutron data collection grew as a plate with the shortest dimension (along a) of 
about 1 mm and a total volume of 8 mm 3. At the completion of its growth, it was rapidly 
transferred to a stabilizing solution containing 10 raM-potassium phosphate (pH 8.2), 
0.02% (w/v) NaN 3 and 30% PEG of average M r 20,000. We have found that the presence 
of PEG enhances stability of the crystals during storage. The large crystal was deuterated 
by slow addition of stabilizing solution made with 2H20 instead of H20. Heavy water used 
in this study was manufactured in 1983 by the facility in Rjukan, Norway (batch 367, 
initial isotopic purity 99.997%). Even though the PEG used in the stabilizing solution was 
not deuterated, it was not expected to increase the incoherent background since such a 
large polymer probably cannot enter the crystal. Several complete exchanges of the solvent 
were made during a period of about 3 months. The crystal showed no obvious signs of 
deterioration (such as cracking, which was usually observed while deuterating 
ribonuclease A; Wlodawer & SjSlin, 1983). It was mounted in a quartz tube and 
immobilized with quartz wool (WIodawer. 1980). Contrary to previous practice, the crystal 


--- PAGE 4 ---
304 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
was dried and only a small drop of mother liquor was placed at the bottom of the tube. The 
tube was sealed with silicone grease, wax and Epoxy, preventing any possibility of drying. 
Protein crystals mounted in such a manner were found to be stable for years (Wlodawer, 
1982). 
(b) Data collection and processing 
X-ray intensity data were collected on a computer-controlled 4-circle Siemens 
diffractometer using the (0/20 scan technique. Ni-filtered CuK~ radiation was used. Focus- 
to-crystal distance was 37 cm and crystal-to-detector distance was 32 cm. The intensity 
profile of each reflection was scanned twice in steps of 1/100 ° in o~. The background was 
measured on each side of the peak. In total, 18 crystals with volumes of up to 0'5 mm 3 
were used for measurements to 0.94 A resolution. A reference reflection was measured for 
each crystal every hour; it served as an indicator of radiation damage and was used for 
scaling of the individual data sets. However; no sin 0/£ dependence was considered in this 
scaling procedure. Crystals were discarded as soon as the intensities of the reference 
reflections dropped by more than 10% . The intensity data from each crystal were corrected 
for absorption by an empirical method (Huber & Kopfman, 1969). Absorption reflections 
were measured to 1.4 A resolution. The transmission surface was extrapolated for higher- 
resolution data. This may have introduced some errors, especially to the data at very high 
resolution, and could have been partially responsible for the relatively high R factor after 
refinement (see below). 
The absorption-corrected data from all crystals were merged and scaled together by 
means of the overlap of the various data sets using the PI~OTEIN program system of 
W. Steigemann (Steigemann, 1974). Table 1 summarizes the X-ray intensity data- 
collection statistics. 
Neutron data were collected using the flat-cone diffractometer (Prince et al., 1978) 
located at the National Bureau of Standards Reactor. The neutrons were monochromatized 
by reflection from a 50 mm× 100 mm graphite crystal that had a mosaic spread of 40 rain. 
The wavelength of the neutrons was 1.68 A. The neutron flux, measured in the sample 
position with a calibrated fission monitor, was 6 × 10 e neutrons em -2 s-1 (estimated error 
+ 10%). The diffractometer was equipped with a linear position-sensitive detector 1 m 
long, mounted vertically on the counter arm. 
The neutron diffraction data set was collected in 2 parts. A data set extending to 2.0 A 
resolution for the level /c = 0 and somewhat higher resolution for the upper levels was 
TABLE 1 
X-ray intensity data collection statistics 
No. No. of Completeness Resolution 
of unique of data range 
nleasurements reflections Rrnerget (%) (A) 
Total 41385 
F > 0 33612 26499 0.049 76.4 0.94-o9 
50.2 0.94-0.96 
F > 0.25<F> 23902 18296 0.047 54.0 0-94-00 
7.8 0.94-0.96 
F > 2.5a 24387 18831 0.046 55'9 0.94-00 
after scaling including F¢ 14.8 0.94-0-96 
F > 0-13<F> 26487 20739 0-055 61.9 0-94-6.0 
7.3 0.94-0.96 
5~ I(I)-II '~ Rmerge - ~ I , the summation is over all measurements with more than one 
I = unique reflection, whose average intensity is (I>. 
measurement, 


--- PAGE 5 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 305 
collected in flat-cone geometry. In this mode the crystal was rotated around its shortest 
real axis (b) while the data for 1 level were measured. Next, the detector was moved to a 
position appropriate for a new level, and the process was repeated. Altogether data from 11 
levels (]c = 0 to 10) were collected. A 270 ° or longer ~ scan was performed for each level (in 
0.09 ° steps, counting time approx. 2 rain/step), so that each accessible reflection was 
measured at least 3 times. The reflection intensities were integrated by using the dynamic 
mask procedure (SjSlin & Wlodawer, 1981), which improved the precision of the data and 
increased the number of statistically significant reflections [I > 1.5a(I)]. Symmetry R 
factors ranged from 0.048 for lower levels to 0.126 for the level ]c = 10; 3380 unique 
reflections out of the total of 3893 were considered to be observed. 
Reflections either inaccessible in the flat-cone geometry or beyond the resolution range 
accessible in the chosen setting of the diffractometer were measured in equatorial 
geometry, neglecting intensities falling outside of the equatorial plane of the instrument. 
The reflections were measured by an (9 step-scan method, with 61 steps counted every 
0.025 ° (total width l'5°). The time spent counting each reflection was about 20 rain. This 
time is approximate since the counting periods were based on the output of a low-efficiency 
main-beam monitor, which compensated for the flux instability. 
The data measured in the equatorial and flat-cone geometries were merged by using the 
scaling algorithm of Hamilton et al. (1965). The combined data set did not have any blind 
regions, which would have been present if the crystal were rotated around a single axis in 
the flat-cone geometry. The scaling R factor was 0"076. (Rsc ~ = ~, IF 1 -sY21/~, F1, where 
F 1 and F 2 represented the structure amplitudes measured in the equatorial and flat-cone 
geometries, respectively.) The data were virtually complete to 1-8 A resolution, with some 
reflections measured in a shell extending to 1.66 ~,. The total number of unique reflections 
considered to be observed was 4044 (78°/o of the theoretical maximum). Over half of the 
reflections in the shell at 1-82 A were observed. 
The contamination of the beam with neutrons of wavelength ),/2 was estimated by 
measuring a number of axial reflections prohibited by the symmetry of the space group of 
the BPTI crystal (P212121). Measurable intensities were observed for the reflections 001, 
003, 030, 500 and 700. The ratios F2()[/2)/F2()[) for these reflections averaged 0.028 ± 0'006, 
in good agreement with the 20% contamination of the incident beam expected from the 
Maxwellian distribution. Since the reflectivity of crystals increases as a function of)3 the 
sample crystal helps in monochromatizing the beam. A computer program was written to 
apply the 2/2 correction to the diffraction data. Since the corrected data set differed only 
very slightly from the starting data set (R = 0.003), we are of the opinion that the influence 
of neutrons with wavelength )[/2 is so small that it is practically negligible for protein data 
collection at the resolution of less than about 1.5 A, 
(e) Computational procedure8 for joint refinement 
The computational procedure for the joint protein structure refinement with the X-ray 
and neutron data was used for BPTI refinement. This procedure was described in detail by 
Wlodawer & Hendrickson (1982) and was previously used successfully for ribonuclease A 
(Wlodawer & SjSlin~ 1983). It required relatively minor conceptual modifications to the 
stereochemically restrained refinement procedures (Hendrickson & Konnert, 1981) that 
have been used successfully to refine a number of protein structures. The principal 
modifications enabled hydrogens to be included in the model, with separate scattering 
lengths for H and 2H atoms. The X-ray and neutron diffraction data had separate weights, 
but otherwise all diffraction data, together with stereochemical restraint information, were 
used to calculate a single matrix. Relative weights for the 2 types of data were determined 
on the basis of experience and were not directly related to their estimated standard 
deviations. We aimed at balancing the influence of these factors and at preventing 
domination of the refinement by either type of data. Amino acid standard groups that 
contained hydrogen positions were prepared on the basis of neutron structures whenever 
available. The contribution of hydrogen atoms was initially neglected in the calculation of 


--- PAGE 6 ---
306 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
X-ray scattering factors, while their positions were identified as either H or :H for the 
choice of appropriate scattering lengths in the neutron calculations. In the last stages of 
refinement hydrogen atoms were used with X-ray data as well. The version of the program 
used for full structure refinement did not allow variable hydrogen/deuterium occupancy 
ratios. A separate version was therefore used to refine these occupancies. This special 
version of the refinement program allowed the occupancies for all atoms (and not only 
hydrogen) to vary and was run only to refine the occupancies, that is, without allowing the 
positional and thermal parameters to vary (Wlodawer & SjSlin, 1982). 
Difference Fourier maps were examined by using interactive computer graphics. The 
program FRODO (Jones, 1978), implemented on the VAXl]/780 for the Evans and 
Sutherland Multi-Picture System by B. Bush, allowed us to manipulate the model and to 
fit it to density maps. The difference Fourier maps were usually calculated with either 
X-ray or neutron coefficients of the type 2F o- F¢. For some regions where the structure 
was more seriously in doubt, the maps were sometimes calculated with the coefficients 
Fo- F¢ after the contribution of a portion of the atoms to structure factor calculations was 
subtracted. Such "fragment AF" maps were expected to show less refinement-induced bias. 
3. Results 
(a) X-ray structure refinement 
The steps of X-ray structure refinement are summarized in Table 2. Initially 
the refined model of the crystal form I (Deisenhofer & Steigemann, 1975; 
Marquart et al., 1983) was oriented and shifted in the form II crystal cell 
according to the unique solutions provided by Patterson search calculations 
(Walter & Huber, 1983). Structure factors calculated for this transformed model 
had an R factor of 0.463 in the resolution range 2.5 to 8.0 A. Residues 1 to 3 and 
57 to 58 as well as the 60 ordered water molecules observed in the first crystal 
form were initially excluded from structure-factor calculation. The refinement was 
started by applying a rigid-body procedure (CORELS; Sussman et al., 1977). Only 
three rotational and three translational parameters were varied while data 
between 3.0 A and 6.0 A resolution were included. After four cycles of CORELS 
the shifts were small (0.04 A translation and 2 ° rotation), but the R factor 
dropped to 0.386 (2.5 to 8.0 A). 
Structure refinement was continued with the energy restraint refinement 
program EREF of Jack & Levitt (1978) modified by H. Deisenhofer and 
G. Remington. The potential energy parameters suggested by Levitt (1974) were 
used. During the cyclic refinement procedure Fo-F¢ Fourier maps were 
calculated and inspected either as stacked minimaps or at a Vector General 
graphics display system with the program FRODO (Jones, 1978). The resolution 
of the included reflection data was increased in stages during the refinement. 
In the early stages of refinement (see Table 2) electron density was observed for 
residues 1 to 3, which were omitted from structure-factor calculations at the 
beginning. All atoms of the N-terminal residues Argl, Pro2 and Asp3, except the 
carboxyl group of Asp3, were located in the electron density and activated for 
refinement. No significant density was detectable for the C-terminal residues 
Gly57 (except for the amide N) and Ala58 even in the final stage of X-ray 
refinement. In the crystal form I electron density was observed for both residues 
only during the final stages of EREF refinement (H. Deisenhofer, personal 
communication). 


--- PAGE 7 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 307 
In the course of refinement about 70 density peaks were interpreted as ordered 
water molecules and activated for refinement. Between Arg20 NH1 and Tyr35 
OH very close density peaks were observed which originally were assigned as 
water molecules, later removed from structure-factor calculations and finally, 
during the joint X-ray and neutron refinement, identified as a phosphate group 
(see below). 
Weaker energy restraints (about one-third of those suggested by M. Levitt) 
were applied next and finally a few cycles of energetically unrestrained refinement 
(free atom refinement) were carried out. In this ease the standard deviation of 
bond lengths increased to more than 0.08 A and the standard deviation of bond 
angles to more than 5 ° . As expected, the largest deviations from ideal geometry 
were observed for the side-chain groups less-defined in the Fourier maps. For 
example, the bond distances of Glu7 CG-CD and Glu49 CD-OE2 became 1.9 A 
and 0.9 A, respectively. This refinement procedure converged to an R value of 
0-198. 
At this stage we decided to refine anisotropic thermal parameters of the model 
using the restrained refinement program PROLSQ (Hendrickson & Konnert, 
1981). The anisotropie fl factors were restrained to prevent unreasonably large 
deviations. Again, we experimented with two different paths of refinement of 
positional parameters. The r.m.s, deviations of the unrestrained refined model 
from ideal geometry, 0.094 A for bond lengths and 5.58 ° for bond angles (main 
chain: 0.059 A and 4.37 °, respectively), were regarded as unacceptably large. 
Figure 1 shows the positional deviations of the backbone atoms (N, CA, C) after 
optimal superposition of the restrained and unrestrained refined models. The 
refined anisotropic temperature factors turned out, on the whole, to be reasonable 
at least for the well-defined atoms. For example, all four Tyr hydroxyl oxygen 
atoms and 39 of the 56 ordered carbonyl oxygen atoms have their lowest r.m.s. 
deviation from equilibrium position along the C-O bond. 
For the restrained model the overall average temperature factor became 
15.3 _~2 for the protein atoms and 40.9 A2 for the ordered solvent atoms. The R 
factor was 0.196 in the resolution range 0.94 to 6.0 A. This model (stage 19) was 
subsequently used for joint refinement with the neutron data. 
In view of a large number of crystals used to measure X-ray data, we have 
experimented with the use of calculated structure factors as a reference data set 
(weight = 1.0) in the scaling. The use of resealed data resulted in a decrease of the 
R factor by 1"3~o, but introduced no essential structural changes. Since we felt 
that our aim was to achieve high quality of the model rather than the lowest R 
factor, this line of calculations was abandoned, in view of the uncertainties 
introduced by the inclusion of calculated structure factors in the scaling. 
(b) Progress of joint refinement 
The model resulting from restrained X-ray refinement of BPTI was used for the 
initial phasing of the neutron data (disregarding the anisotropic temperature 
factors). The initial R factor was 0"348 for 3950 neutron structure factors, which 
excluded the inner shell extending to 7.2 A, based on a model containing 526 


--- PAGE 8 ---
g 
C 
&- 
iv 
,-~.~ ~ 
I 
~.o. o. o.o. o. 
© 
oo. o. o.o. o. 
~o. . 
mm 
.~© 
o.o~. 
<) 
o. m e~ m 
ooo. 
g 
,-~ 00 
ooo 
<D 
< 
Z 
oo.o. 
~gg 


--- PAGE 9 ---
.>v~ ® ®~ % 
=~ ~. ~ ~ S ~,~ 
~+~.~ ~ 
@ ,boo = ,b 
~.~ 
o ® <'< o <~ : 
o ~ o~ ~ ~oc~ 6 
.~ 
~.~ 
o ~ 
<~> 0 • o o00 O 
o 
~4 
o 
I i I 
0 
I 
cS 
C4 i I 
~d~ 6 
© 
? 
~g g 


--- PAGE 10 ---
i 
o .~ 
o 
o ~, ~ 
E 
0 
2- 
c~ 
c~ 
o 
0 
o o o o o o 
o ~ 6 
- 6 o 6 o 
(y) UO!,LD!^aQ 
© 
© 
b~ 
"F, 
o 


--- PAGE 11 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 311 
.... / /,$-.-,,; :', , .... . --- _- 
"X_+ ~ 
: ..... ' ;E~ 
' i 
1-I- ++ 
• s ;i .;;.- : ,.., ff +' +"++ i / 
I ~ "- /I'll 
Fro. 2. Neutron difference Fourier maps for 2 well-ordered side-chains, Phe4 (top) and Tyr21 
(bottom). All maps are of the 2Fo-F¢ type. The maps on the left were calculated before the start of 
joint refinement and are based on the model that excluded hydrogen atoms. Maps on the right are 
based on the final model after joint refinement. Lowest contour level is 1F for positive density 
(unbroken lines) and 0.SF for negative density (broken lines). Subsequent positive contours are plotted 
every 0.5F, negative contours every 0-25F. 
non-hydrogen atoms only. The quality of the resulting difference maps was 
nevertheless quite good even at this stage, with many hydrogen atoms whose 
positions should have been predetermined by stereochemistry clearly visible 
(Fig. 2). It was also clear at this stage that some methyl rotors could be oriented 
properly (Fig. 3) and that some amide hydrogen atoms were protected from 
exchange, while others were present as deuterium atoms (Fig. 4). 


--- PAGE 12 ---
312 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
HB3 .... 
+S ~_ "- N 
t + +." ~.@, 
,, .,.., . .~ .. ,, ', ,".~, HB: , ~ ,' ,, -~+ ", ,'- : '..._'2~/ , /// 
i ~ ~- .-'+ +++ +++ + + 
,//.- .... 2"-2..'. + 
/,','////" £BV--:'-'.-:-'.'.', 
l/ f// / / % } ~ ' ~ i [ [ 
; ~ ~ ,, ++ . / + , ",. + +. 
,'1+ + 
+ / , , /, i ~ ~ , 
-+ + + i f. ',-" ~ ', t ' 
++ /" +~ ~'', "~ "t 
J E , z + i J 
i ~ i , "~+ i i 1 
A-F, , , It',', 
/' ,/,/,'~t 4G2 
/ / / / +q~ / ++ 7~/ ++ ++ /+' 
"\ ~ . ..... • + + + + + 
'.........-. ..... g;t;,;,;/ 
-...::..- :. ..... . / / 
---::::-_:_/ 
+1 
+ 
CA /' 
++ + ,/ 
Z ++ 
/ i, / i, 
J 
t j 
4G25', I 
CG.2--. "-. -".\ 
..... ~1 + +' 
i 
FIG. 3. Sections through the planes containing hydrogen atoms of the terminal methyl groups of 
Alal6 (top), Ala27 (middle) and Thrll (bottom). All maps are of the Fo-F¢ type, calculated after 
excluding the methyl groups from phasing. Lowest negative contour level is 0.4F, subsequent levels 
contoured every 0.2F. Left: maps before refinement; right, maps after refinement. 


--- PAGE 13 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 313 
-:/==y.::, " • " / "t 
";;:::'. i 
7 
\\ "--><~(~igcA(.:.:L:.:::: //:~ -: 
',' , , : ; 
" ?.227. 
36CA 
Fie. 4. Sections through the planes of peptide bonds for residues 18, 19 and 37. Neutron 2Fo-F c 
maps were calculated before (left) and after (right) joint refinement. Contour levels as in Fig. 2. 
Hydrogen atoms were added to this model in stereoehemieally feasible positions 
with a program HAFFIX, written by W. Hendriekson. All potentially 
exchangeable hydrogen was assumed to be deuterium, while those carbon-bound 
(and therefore unlikely to exchange) were assigned as hydrogen. This new model 
12 


--- PAGE 14 ---
314 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
;', DE22 
. .' ., CO ,;--,', 
+/.- i 
CG 
FIG. 5. Sections through 2Fo-F ~ neutron difference Fourier maps of Gln31 before joint refinement 
(left) and after manual reorientation followed by refinement (right). Contoured as in Fig. 2. 
was then examined using computer graphics and compared with the map 
described above. The positions of a number of deuterium atoms belonging to side- 
chain hydroxyl groups were quite obvious and were adjusted accordingly. These 
changes were introduced to threonines 11, 32 and 54, to tyrosines 23 and 35, and 
to Ser47. It became very likely that the side-chain amide of Gln31 was improperly 
assigned and the position of the oxygen and of the nitrogen with attached 
deuterium atoms was reversed (Fig. 5). The map also suggested the necessity for 
slight adjustment of the positions of the side-chain atoms of Lys46, Met52 and 
Arg53. No attempt was made at this stage to orient terminal methyl groups and 
while their arbitrary co-ordinates were kept, the hydrogen atoms were assigned 
zero weights. Similarly, even though many amide hydrogens could have been 
assigned unambiguously as either hydrogen or deuterium, this was not done and 
their weights were kept as zero. This conservative approach was followed in order 
to prevent any model-induced bias from influencing subsequent refinement. 
This model was used as a starting point of joint refinement with the X-ray and 
neutron data. Initial R factors were 0.217 for the X-ray data in the I0 to 0.94 A 
shell and 0.315 for the neutron data extending from i0 to 1.8 A. Fourteen cycles 
of refinement lowered the respective R factors to 0"210 and 0.232 while the 
agreement of the model with the standard geometry was made considerably worse 
(for example, r.m.s, deviations in bond lengths not involving hydrogen atoms 
increased from 0.020 to 0.028 A and deviations of planar atoms from ideal 
positions increased from 0.019 to 0@27 A). As expected, the new difference 
Fourier map was much less noisy than the original one and was consequently 
easier to interpret. 
At this stage, the identity of amide hydrogen atoms was investigated in a 
neutron refinement in which the positional and thermal parameters for all atoms 
was kept constant while their occupancies were allowed to vary. Temperature 
factors for the amide hydrogen atoms were assigned as (B+ ~/~) of the adjacent 
nitrogens (Kossiakoff, 1982). Convergence was reached after ten cycles and while 


--- PAGE 15 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 
0 
315 
-0-01 - 
-0"0~ - Thrll F 
8 cn 
-0-05 
AIo27 
0 07 I I I I I 
0 20 40 60 80 I00 120 
Rotor ongle 
FIG. 6. Plots of the sums of neutron scattering densities for the hydrogen atoms of terminal methyl 
groups of Ala27, Ala16 and Thrll, expressed as functions of the torsion angles for these groups. 
Details of the calculations are given in the text. 
the occupancies of a majority of deuteriums tended to average about 0.75, 11 of 
them turned negative, indicating the presence of unexchanged hydrogen atoms. 
There was no clear indication of partially exchanged sites and we tentatively 
interpreted the lower average occupancy of the exchanged sites as being due to 
the errors in the estimates of the temperature factors for the amides, resulting 
from previous refinement. The new assignments of the amides were used in 
subsequent refinements. 
The orientation of methyl hydrogen atoms was investigated in a manner 
suggested by Kossiakoff & Spencer (1981). Sections of Fo-F ¢ difference Fourier 
maps were calculated in planes containing all three hydrogen atoms of each 
methyl group and the sums of scattering densities corresponding to all atoms were 
plotted as a function of the torsion angle in increments of l0 °. These plots had 
clear minima for most methyl groups (Fig. 6), even though the maps themselves 
were seldom clear (Fig. 3). We also tried a similar approach using X-ray data 
extending to 1 A resolution, but the peaks due to the scattering of hydrogen were 
much less pronounced, confirming the neutron data to be much more suitable for 
this purpose, even though their resolution was much lower. 
Examination of the 2Fo-F ¢ maps indicated the possibility of alternative 
orientations due to static disorder for four side-chains: Glu7, Glu49, Met52 and 
Arg53. A number' of other residues were also adjusted manually and the 
interpretation of solvent was revised. This new model was further refined, yielding 
R factors of 0.217 and 0"218 for the X-ray and neutron data, respectively. 
Reinterpretation of the X-ray difference Fourier map indicated that the positions 
originally assigned to water molecules 300 and 301 are probably occupied by a 
well-ordered phosphate (the neutron map was ambiguous). Densities correspond- 
ing to atoms belonging to one side-chain, which was previously considered to be 
disordered (Asp3), now appeared in the X-ray and neutron maps, but the 
alternative positions for Glu49 and Arg53 were no longer clear and were deleted 


--- PAGE 16 ---
316 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
>" I'0 
0.5 
~ i.o 
2 H 
 lfll frrFJIrrrr,i 
I I I I I 
I 0 20 30 40 50 
Residue number 
FIG. 7. Occupancies of amide hydrogen atoms in BPTI as a function of residue numbers. Atoms that 
are predominantly deuterium in character are plotted above the central line, hydrogen is plotted below 
the mark. Every 10th residue is marked by an open circle; asterisks denote proline residues, which 
have no amide hydrogen atoms. Scatter of occupancies beyond 1.0 is an indication of errors in their 
determination. 
from the model. Most methyl rotors were also assigned. Two amino acids on the 
carboxyl end were placed in the density, which now appeared in both maps (quite 
clear in the X-ray map and not as good in the neutron map), and their 
occupancies were set to l. 
In the subsequent refinement the lower limit of resolution of the data was 
increased from l0 to 7.2 A, eliminating about 50 reflections from each data set for 
5[; 
FIG. 8. Diagram of hydrogen bonds involving the main-chain atoms and the level of protection of 
amide hydrogen atoms. Only bonds shorter than 3.15 A and with expected angles are shown. Filled 
circles correspond to protected amide hydrogen atoms. 


--- PAGE 17 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 317 
which the observed and calculated structure factors were in poor agreement. In 
this round of refinement, occupancies of the solvent atoms were allowed to vary, 
with the temperature factors and occupancy shifts applied in alternate cycles. The 
restraints on the geometry of the model were tightened; nevertheless the R factors 
were lowered to 0.203 and 0.204 when convergence was reached. 
The co-ordinates were again subjected to seven cycles of occupancy refinement 
in order to finalize the assignments of amide hydrogens. Resulting occupancies are 
shown in Figure 7. The distribution of protected and exchanged hydrogen atoms 
was unchanged compared to the initial assignment, while individual occupancies 
were much closer to unity. Again, there was no indication of any partially 
protected sites. 
At this stage all protein atoms were assigned full occupancies and only the 
solvent molecules were subtracted (or added) as indicated by the difference 
Fourier maps. Three more cycles of refinement followed by examination of the 
maps completed the procedure. The resulting model has R factors of 0.200 (X-ray) 
and 0.197 (neutron). The bond lengths differ from the ideal values by 0.020 A for 
non-hydrogen atoms and 0.018 A for hydrogen, the departure from planarity is 
0.019 A and the chiral volumes differ by 0.232 A 3 from their ideal values. 
(c) Secondary structure 
The secondary structure of BPTI in the new crystal form is virtually identical 
to that observed previously. The hydrogen bonds involving main chain atoms are 
shown in Figure 8. Two regions of the structure are helical. The a helix near the 
carboxyl terminus includes six hydrogen bonds (almost three turns) and is quite 
regular. The residues forming this helix extend from Ser47 through Gly56. This 
helix does not show the amphipathic character described by Blundell et al. (1983), 
since only one water molecule is found within a hydrogen bond distance of a 
carboxyl oxygen. The length of the hydrogen bond between the carboxyl of Glu49 
(which is also hydrogen-bonded to Watl01) and the amino group of Art53 is 
2-84 A, not significantly different from the 2.91 A average hydrogen bond length 
for this helix (2.87 A if we do not include the long bond on the amino end of the 
helix). Average conformational angles for this helix are (-63 °, -41.5°), closer to 
the values compiled by Blundell et al. (1983) for a "hydrophilic" helix than to 
those of a "hydrophobic" helix. The average length of the hydrogen bonds is close 
to the average for the other hydrophobic helices; similarly, the average C-O-N 
angle is 154 ° (150.5 ° if the angle on the amino end of the helix is excluded), closer 
to the hydrophobic than to the hydrophilic values. 
Another helical region in BPTI involves one and a half turns of 31o helix near 
the amino terminus of the protein. The three hydrogen bonds involved in this 
helix were not mentioned as such after the previous refinement (Deisenhofer & 
Steigemann, 1975), even though this region is very similar in both crystal forms 
and the presence of a helix in this segment was originally reported (Huber et al., 
1970). The helical nature of this fragment was also recognized by others, 
sometimes correctly (Levitt, 1983; Wagner, 1983), and sometimes incorrectly as 
helix (Levitt, 1981; Brooks & Karplus, 1983). 


--- PAGE 18 ---
318 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
The central part of the BPTI molecule consists of a double-stranded 
antiparallel fl structure extending from residues 16 to 36. Three pairs of hydrogen 
bonds are very regular, with less regularity found near the ends of the sheet. In 
addition, a pair of bonds between Tyr21 and Phe45 adds a suggestion of another 
short strand, while another extension of the sheet is due to a bond between Thrll 
and Gly36. A sharp turn with the angles characteristic for 27 ribbon is caused by a 
hydrogen bond between Ash44 and Arg42. 
(d) Intermolecular hydrogen bonds 
The number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds found in this crystal form of 
BPTI is quite low. The only main chain bond is made by the amide N of Argl7 
and the carbonyl O of Ala25; the bond length is 3.12 A. Three other hydrogen 
bonds are made by peptide atoms. The hydroxyl group of Tyr21 makes a bond to 
the carbonyl oxygen of Ala27, while nitrogens NH1 and NH2 of Arg39 make 
hydrogen bonds to the carbonyl oxygen atoms of Asn44 and Arg42, respectively. 
Eight intermolecular hydrogen bonds involve water bridges (one of them is 
formed by the disordered side-chain of Glu7), and an additional six involve water- 
to-water contacts. The phosphate forms three hydrogen bonds with the side- 
chains of Arg20 and Tyr35 belonging to one BPTI molecule and one bond with 
Lys41 of another. The small number of intermolecular hydrogen-bonded 
interactions is important in interpreting the results of hydrogen-exchange data 
(see below), since it is unlikely that so few interactions could seriously modify the 
flexibility and accessibility to solvent of different parts of the secondary structure 
of BPTI, compared to the situation existing in solution. 
(e) Unsatisfied hydrogen bonds 
Very few groups that are potentially capable of forming hydrogen bonds are not 
involved in such interactions. Only two main chain carbonyl oxygens (belonging 
to residues 15 and 37) do not have identifiable hydrogen bond partners. Both 
carbonyl groups are located on the surface of the protein and it is most likely that 
they are hydrated, but the putative water molecules are disordered and thus were 
not included in the final model. We did not establish any clear hydrogen bonds for 
seven main-chain amide nitrogens. Four of them are on the surface, including 
three (32, 57 and 58) that are a part of or in close proximity to the carboxyl 
terminus, which is at least partially disordered. It is certain that not all of the 
available density has been fully accounted for in this region, so the previous 
argument applies here as well. Three non-bonded amides are buried 
(29, 47 and 49), with the latter two found in a quite hydrophobic environment. 
The absence of hydrogen bonds in their case is dictated by the structure and must 
lead to some increase in the energy of the stable form of the protein. However, 
this type of a compromise must be expected, even in view of its unfavorable 
energetics, since it is unlikely that a protein can be folded in a fashion regular 
enough to satisfy all possible hydrogen bonds. We can see, though, that the 
number of clear exceptions is quite small. 


--- PAGE 19 ---
STRUCTURE OF TI~YPSIN INHIBITOI~ 319 
(f) Hydrogen exchange 
The information about amide hydrogen exchange, not available in the X-ray 
structure determination, becomes accessible during analysis of the neutron data. 
This happens as a by-product of the soaking of the crystals in deuterated mother 
liquor, done in order to reduce the incoherent background caused by the presence 
of hydrogen atoms in the protein. The time required for the exchange of 
unprotected amide hydrogens is much less than the several months usually spent 
on solvent exchange, while the most highly protected amides can stay unchanged 
longer than that (Rosa & Richards, 1981). Neutron methods were successfully 
used to establish the pattern of amide hydrogen exchange in several proteins. 
These included ribonuclease A (Wlodawer & SjSlin, 1982,1983), trypsin 
(Kossiakoff, 1982), lysozyme (Bentley et al., 1983; Mason et al., 1984), 
metmyoglobin (Raghavan & Sehoenborn, 1984) and erambin (Teeter & 
Kossiakoff, 1984). Ribonuelease results could be compared with the individual 
assignments derived by chemical means (Rosa & Richards, 1981,1983), with fair 
agreement between the two techniques. The discrepancies were probably due 
mostly to the experimental difficulties inherent in the proteolytic technique, since 
the errors in amide occupancies were estimated at +15% in the neutron 
experiment (Wlodawer & Sj51in, 1982). 
n.m.r, has gained wide acceptance in recent years as a technique suitable for 
studies of hydrogen exchange. It is much easier experimentally than the chemical 
methods and can yield exchange rates for individual protons. The main difficulty 
lies in the interpretation of the results, since the assignment of resonances in the 
n.m.r, spectra is not straightforward. While 32 amide resonances have been 
assigned in the n.m.r, spectra of lysozyme and their exchange rates have been 
compared with the estimates available from a neutron experiment (Bentley et al., 
1983), assignment of practically all amides has been achieved so far for only one 
protein, namely BPTI. Partial results for BPTI were obtained by Richarz et al. 
(1979) using the traditional proton n.m.r, technique, while the remaining 
exchange rates were obtained using two-dimensional n.m.r. (Wagner & Wiithrich, 
1982). For these reasons, we considered BPTI to be an ideal protein for testing the 
agreement between the results of these two techniques. 
The occupancies of amide hydrogen atoms resulting from this study are shown 
in Figure 7. This Figure shows quite clearly the presence of two classes of amide 
hydrogen atoms, one corresponding to the unexchanged hydrogen atoms with 
negative scattering, the other to the exchanged ones, for which the scattering is 
positive. If all amides contained deuterium atoms, their average occupancy would 
be 0.65 (standard deviation 0"57). This compares with 0.97 (0.1) for the 58 amide 
nitrogens, 0"94 (0.13) for ~ carbons, 0.97 (0.07) for carbonyl oxygens and 0.90 
(0-14) for ~ hydrogens. On the other hand, by separating the positive and negative 
scatterers, the average occupancy for the 43 amide deuteriums is 0.94 (0.12) and 
for 11 amide hydrogens 0-90 (0.09), in line with the occupancies of other main- 
chain atoms. The deviations of the average occupancies from 1.0 are due to the 
errors introduced in refinement (most probably in the estimates of temperature 
factors) and are in agreement with the estimated accuracy of the final structure of 


--- PAGE 20 ---
320 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
the protein. The fact that the standard deviations of the two classes of amide 
hydrogens are of the same order as for the neighboring atoms shows that we have 
not detected any partially exchanged sites. While unusual, such a situation is by 
no means impossible. 
The fraction of amide hydrogen atoms protected from exchange under the 
experimental conditions was 20~o. By comparison, the fraction of fully and 
partially protected amide hydrogen atoms was 22.5% in ribonuelease (Wlodawer 
& SjSlin, 1982), 32% in trypsin (Kossiakoff, 1982), and 43% in lysozyme (Bentley 
et al., 1983). Only 3~o of amide hydrogen atoms were found to be even partially 
protected in metmyoglobin after ten years of exchange (Raghavan & Schoenborn, 
1984), while 53% were unexchanged and 24% were partially exchanged in 
crambin after a week of exchange (Teeter & Kossiakoff, 1984). The degree of 
protection observed for these proteins varies widely and is clearly more dependent 
on experimental conditions than on the nature of the protein. These results show 
little if any correlation between the size of the proteins and the overall degree of 
protection, even though the relative size of the inner core must be much larger in 
the proteins having the longer chain. It seems quite remarkable that a protein as 
small as BPTI has a sufficiently large hydrophobic core to offer such a degree of 
protection from exchange. 
The comparison of the individual amide hydrogen atoms observed as protected 
from exchange in the neutron experiment with their rate constants for the 
exchange as observed by n.m.r. (Wagner, 1983) shows a remarkable degree of 
qualitative agreement. One should keep in mind that the n.m.r, exchange rates 
were quoted at pH 3"5, 36°C, while the crystal used for the neutron experiment 
was soaked at pH 8.2, 22°C. Nevertheless, of the 11 amides with a rate of 
exchange lower than 10 .5 min -1 only one was found to be exchanged in the 
neutron experiment. This amide belongs to Asn44, and its quoted rate of 
exchange (0.75 x 10-5 rain-1) is three times higher than for the next slower amide 
in this group (Ilel8). Most of the protected amides are involved in making 
hydrogen bonds in the regular part of the antiparallel fl pleated sheet. The only 
two exceptions are the amide of Tyr23, making a strong hydrogen bond with the 
oxygen OD1 of Asn43, and Gly37, which makes no apparent hydrogen bonds 
(Fig. 9). Protection of the latter amide is particularly puzzling. Its resonance was 
not observed in the n.m.r, experiment, so that the neutron result was quite 
unexpected. It appears that the reason for this protection is the proximity of the 
phenyl ring of Tyr35. The distance between the amide hydrogen and the center of 
the ring is 2.6 A, and it might be possible that the ring itself is serving as an 
acceptor of a quasi hydrogen bond. It is interesting to note that another 
hydrogen, belonging to the side-chain amide of Asn44, is found at the same 
distance on the other side of the ring, but this one is clearly exchanged. It is well 
known, though, that the rates of exchange for the side-chain amide hydrogens are 
much higher than those for the main chain, so we would not expect the ring to 
offer much protection in the latter ease. 
The distribution of protected amides in the structure of BPTI is in good 
agreement with our understanding of the mechanism of hydrogen exchange and 
with the patterns of protection noticed in other proteins. It has been noted before 


--- PAGE 21 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 321 
/ / / 
A~ 
rY~ 
FIe. 9. Stereo diagram showing positions of all amide nitrogen atoms in the BPTI molecule as well 
as of those amide hydrogen atoms that were found to be protected from exchange. Also included are 
the side-chains of Tyr35 and of Asn43, which play a role in protecting amide hydrogen atoms from 
exchange. 
that fi sheet offers much better protection from exchange than a helix, and that 
only scattered amides are protected by the interaction with side-chains. The 
segment of an ~ helix present in BPTI contains six hydrogen bonds and all of its 
amides are shielded from the solvent. Nevertheless, neither n.m.r, nor neutron 
data show appreciable protection from exchange for this part of the chain. 
Similarly, the three amides forming a short 31o helix at the amino terminus are 
fully exchanged. Only the amides found in the very regular central part of the 
fi sheet are protected, while those forming the less-regular fringes (Gly28, Alal6) 
are not. The amide of Asn44 is involved in a sharp 27 type turn and thus is less 
likely to be protected, as shown by its rate of exchange being the highest among 
the "slow" amides. We found no evidence that the intermolecular contacts in the 
crystal affect the relative rates of exchange of highly protected amides in any 
measurable way. 
While the qualitative agreement between the results of the n.m.r, and neutron 
measurements is truly excellent, some unanswered questions about the correlation 
of actual exchange rates still remains. Assuming that the exchange of less than 
10~o of the protons of any particular amide during the four months spent soaking 
the crystal in deuterated mother liquor would be undetectable in the neutron 
experiment, we arrive at the maximum exchange rates of 0"6 × 10 -6 rain-1 for the 
11 protected protons. While this rate is well within the range listed by Wagner 
(1983), we should not forget the differences of pH and of temperature in the two 
experiments. Rieharz et al. (1979) investigated the dependence of rate constants 
on the temperature and pH, and while only fragmentary results were presented, it 
is clear that at room temperature the exchange rates are faster by three to four 
orders of magnitude at pH 8 compared to pH 3.5. The only reasons for the slower 
overall exchange observed in the neutron experiment compared to an analogous 


--- PAGE 22 ---
322 
1-20 
A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
1.00 
0"80 v 
g 
~- 0"60 .£ 
o 0.40 
0.20 
O.C 
0 5 I0 15 20 25 30 55 40 45 50 55 
Residue number 
FIG. 10. Positional deviations along the polypeptide backbone (N, 05, C) after optimal superposition 
of BPTI molecules in crystal forms I and II. 
solution measurement could be traced either to the differences in the composition 
of the buffer or to the intrinsic protection offered by the crystal. While the mother 
liquor used to soak BPTI crystals contained PEG M, 20,000, it is unlikely that 
such a large polymer could diffuse into the crystal. Thus, we must conclude that 
the process of hydrogen exchange must be slowed by the crystalline state itself, 
but with the relative rates not affected in any appreciable way. 
(g) Comparison with the structure of crystal form I 
For comparison of the BPTI structure in the new crystal form with that in the 
first, the main chain atoms of both models (excluding Gly57 and Ala58) were 
optimally superimposed by a least-squares procedure. The resulting r.m.s. 
deviation between equivalent main chain atoms was 0-40 A. Figure 10 shows the 
distances between corresponding atoms along the polypeptide backbone (N, Ca, C) 
after superposition of both structures. A stereo pair with C~ atoms of both models 
overlaid is shown in Figure ll. Although the overall conformation of BPTI in 
both crystal forms appears to be very similar, some structural differences which 
TABLE 3 
Major differences between the structure of BPTI in the two 
crystal forms: form I and form II 
(1) Main-chain deviations of over 0'5 A for C~ carbon atoms: 4 residues near N terminus, between 
Lysl5 and Ilel9, Lys26, Leu29, between Arg39 and Lys4l, between Set47 and Asp50, 3 residues at 
C terminus 
(2) Side-chain deviations of over 1-0 A are observed for side-chains of Asp3, Lysl5, ArglV, Ilel9, 
Tyr21, Lys26, Leu29, Arg39, Lys41, Arg42, Glu49, Asp50 and both termini. All except of Ilel9, 
Tyr21 and Leu29 have high temperature factors indicating side-chain flexibility 
(3) Side-chains with orientation changed to avoid unfavorable crystal contacts in form II are Argl7, 
Tyr21, Leu29, Arg42 and Glu49 
(4) The side-chain of Arg39 reoriented to make better intermoleeular hydrogen bonds 
(5) Amide nitrogens and/or carbonyl oxygen atoms of Arg]7; Ilel9, Lys26, Arg39, Ala40 and Ala48 
make hydrogen bonds to ordered water molecules not observed in crystal form I, which may 
contribute to large deviations of these main-chain segments 


--- PAGE 23 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 323 
_~6 
FIG. 11. Optimal superposition of C~ atoms in the model of crystal form I (thin lines) and crystal 
form II (thick lines). 
significantly exceed the expected errors in analysis are observed. These differences 
are summarized in Table 3. 
At the N terminus the guanidinium group of Argl is shifted by more than 1 A 
compared to the structure of form I, allowing different hydrogen bond 
interactions in both crystal forms. The C-terminal residues Gly57 and Ala58, for 
which some electron density was observed only during joint X-ray and neutron 
refinement, occupy different conformations as well. Ala58 appears to be about 7 A 
away from its location in the crystal form I, where the carboxyl group is within 
hydrogen bond distance of Argl7 NH2 of a neighboring molecule. In the form II 
crystal structure Cys30 O and Tyr21 OH of a neighboring molecule are hydrogen 
bond partners of the earboxyl of AlaS8. Weak electron density as well as high 
temperature factors in both crystal forms indicate the probable existence of 
alternative conformations of low occupancy. These results also show that different 
intermolecular contacts can favor fixed but different conformations of flexible 
segments. 
Considering other largely deviating segments, some correlation between them 
due to crystal contaets becomes apparent. Recalling that there are intermolecular 
hydrogen bonds between Argl7 NE and Lys26 O, and between Arg39 


--- PAGE 24 ---
324 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
guanidinium and Glu49 carboxyl and Ala48 N, respectively, in the crystal form I 
and between Arg39 guanidinium and carbonyl oxygen atoms of Lys41, Arg42 and 
Ash44 in the crystal form II, some mutual influence is clearly indicated. 
Although positional differences of up to 0.6 A are observed for amide nitrogen 
and carbonyl oxygen atoms that are involved in hydrogen bond formation of the 
fl structure and the a helix, the corresponding hydrogen bond distances in both 
structures deviate by less than 0.1 A. Positional shifts forced by different 
molecular packing are directed in such a way that any increase in hydrogen bond 
energy is avoided and the elements of secondary structure are preserved. 
The distribution of temperature factors along the polypeptide backbone has 
remarkably similar characteristics in the two structures (Fig. 12), indicating that 
it represents a conserved property of the molecule. This observation agrees with 
the results reported for trigonal and orthorhombic trypsin (Walter et al., 1982) 
and for the comparison of hen and human lysozyme (Artymiuk et al., 1979). In 
particular, the increase of the main chain temperature factors near the carboxyl 
and amino termini emphasizes the high flexibility of the polypeptide chain at 
these locations. The smoother course of the temperature-factor distribution in the 
structure of form II results from the different methods of refinement. The 
temperature factors were not restrained in the refinement of form I structure, 
while restraints of thermal parameters of bonded atoms were included in the joint 
refinement of the crystal structure of form II. 
(h) Solvent structure 
Our interpretation of the solvent structure after joint refinement yields 63 
ordered water molecules and one phosphate group. Twenty-nine water sites have 
full occupancy and the rest are apparently only partially occupied. The lowest 
occupancy in the final model was 0.4. Significant densities were detectable in both 
neutron and X-ray maps for almost all solvent positions, indicating little if any 
difference in the solvent structure that would be due to deuteration. Neutron 
densities for most water molecules were not spherically symmetric and the 
orientation of the deuterium atoms could be discerned from the map for some of 
the water molecules that had the lowest temperature factors. While deuterium 
positions are included in the final model for all water molecules, most of them 
were placed on the basis of probable hydrogen bonds and, while they remained 
rather stable during refinement, we cannot claim that their placement was due 
solely to the experimental data. Indeed, positions for some deuterium atoms 
refined to quite unreasonable orientations and the final model has to be viewed 
with some scepticism in this respect. 
Forty-four water molecules are found within hydrogen bond distances to the 
backbone amides or carbonyl oxygen atoms. Of the remaining 19 water molecules, 
15 form at least one hydrogen bond to a side-chain amide or oxygen. One water 
molecule clearly occupies two sites separated by 1.9 A, with occupancies of 0.5 
and 0.4. Both sites are within hydrogen bond distance of the carbonyl oxygen of 
Lys46. Another water molecule (occupancy 0"7) is located only 1.3 A away from 
the alternative site of the carboxyl group of Glu7. Since the occupancy of this 


--- PAGE 25 ---
i I 
o 
0 
0 ~o 
0 
o 
x...x "x 
x<: 
×~. 
X 
,X x 
-x 
o 
o 
< 
o 
x 
~x 
o 
0 
I 0 
0 
0 
b c.,) 
? 
x 
t 
X 
I 
I 
.© 
b o 
C 
r..) 
E o 
m.~ 
© 
,.£ 
~S 
o 
,S 
.£ 0 
"0 
~F 


--- PAGE 26 ---
326 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
alternative site is 0"3, we may conclude that the water site is occupied only in the 
absence of the amino acid side-chain. Additionally, four unfavorable short 
hydrogen bonds (their lengths vary between 2 A and 2.4 A) may also be explained 
by partial disorder of the hydrogen bond partners. 
One peak detected in the solvent region in the final stages of joint refinement 
remains uninterpreted, even though it is placed in the co-ordinate list as an 
oxygen of water molecule 324. This peak is adjacent to Tyr23 and is located in the 
plane of the ring. It is also close to the sulfur atoms of Cys30 and Met52. The lack 
of suitable hydrogen bond partners, the compact shape of the peak and the 
presence of nearby hydrophobic groups rules out the possibility that this 
represents a water molecule. We suspect that this peak may correspond to a 
potassium ion with partial occupancy, but no proof of this assumption can be 
offered at this time. 
Comparison of the ordered solvent structures in both crystal forms of BPTI 
shows that 20 out of 63 ordered water molecules are located at very similar 
positions (deviation < 1.0 A) and have the same hydrogen bond partners. None of 
these water molecules was involved in intermolecular hydrogen bonding in the 
crystal form I, but five of them are so involved in the crystal form II. Also, two 
oxygen atoms of the phosphate (03, 04) adopt positions close to water sites in the 
crystal form I. The phosphate oxygen atoms 02 and 03 as well as 04 form 
hydrogen bonds to Arg20 NH2, NH1 and Tyr35 OH, respectively, whereas O1 
hydrogen bonds to Lys41 NZ of a neighboring molecule. In this way, the 
phosphate mediates a crystal contact. The four "internal" water molecules 
reported in form I crystals are all present also in the crystals of form II. 
4. Discussion 
High-resolution X-ray and neutron studies of form II crystals of BPTI have 
revealed a structure that is quite similar to that of form I, although differences 
exist that exceed experimental uncertainty. One question not really answered by 
this investigation is the reason why form II crystals diffract so much better than 
those of form I. Higher limits of diffraction are usually obtained for crystals in 
which the protein is more tightly packed, as was, for example, the case for triclinic 
versus tetragonal lysozyme (Kurachi et al., 1976). The fraction of the unit cell 
occupied by the solvent was much lower for the former crystal form than for the 
latter, and thus it was not surprising that the triclinic crystals diffracted much 
better. Crambin crystals, for which observable diffraction has been reported at a 
resolution as high as 0.79 A, contains only 29% solvent, which places it at the low 
extreme of the range (30 to 78%) observed in other protein crystals (Matthews, 
1977). Similarly, only 30% of the unit cell contains solvent in the strongly 
diffracting crystals of the avian pancreatic polypeptide (Wood et al., 1977). 
Crystals of form II of BPTI, on the other hand, actually contain slightly more 
solvent than those of form I (380/0 versus 36°/0). On the other hand, they grow 
much larger and are usually very well formed, which might account for (but not 
fully explain) the observed higher diffraction limit. 


--- PAGE 27 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 327 
Joint refinement of the structure of BPTI with the X-ray and neutron data has 
resulted in a model that has elucidated a number of features that otherwise would 
remain unclear. An example is provided by the ease of the reorientation of the 
side-chain of Gln31. The earboxyl terminus of the protein was also a source of 
considerable difficulty. It is possible that the two residues could have been located 
eventually even in the absence of the neutron data; nevertheless, no density was 
found for them in the final map resulting from X-ray refinement, while it was 
possible to place them after both types of data were used. The neutron data were 
particularly useful in locating hydrogen atoms. While a fraction of hydrogen 
atoms could be placed unambiguously during the refinement of crambin with 
0.945 A X-ray data (Hendriekson, personal communication) and as many as 800/0 
of all hydrogen atoms were resolved in positive regions of the 1.2 A electron 
density map of insulin (Sakabe et al., 1981), our experience evaluating the 1 A 
X-ray map of BPTI was that only relatively few hydrogens could have been 
assigned unambiguously. This was particularly clear in our evaluation of the 
methyl rotors, which were very poorly determined in the X-ray map, while quite 
clear in the neutron map at much lower resolution (Fig. 3). 
When the method of joint refinement of protein structures with X-ray and 
neutron data was first introduced (Wlodawer & Hendrickson, 1982), it was 
postulated that all diffraction data should be collected from identically deuterated 
crystals. This was not followed in the refinement of BPTI, since only crystals used 
to collect neutron data were deuterated. Nevertheless, the comparison of the 
progress of refinement with what was observed in refining the structure of 
ribonuclease A where all crystals were identically deuterated (Wlodawer & SjSlin, 
1983) showed no difficulties due to this effect. This leads us to reconsider this 
requirement and we no longer assume the necessity of identical deuteration as a 
prerequisite of successful joint refinement. 
Information that was derived from the neutron data only led to the assignment 
of the ll amide hydrogen atoms that were found to be protected from exchange 
during the course of this experiment. We have previously remarked on the fact 
that the maximum rate of exchange extrapolated from the neutron data was 
about three orders of magnitude lower than the solution rate observed under 
similar conditions of pH and temperature (Richarz et al., 1979). Englander & 
Kallenbach (1983) discussed the available data for exchange in crystals of several 
proteins and compared them with the rates in solution. They found large 
discrepancies between the reported relative rates of exchange for different 
proteins. On the one hand, there is considerable evidence that exchange rates in 
lysozyme are almost insensitive to crystallization (Bentley et.al., 1983); on the 
other, unambiguous slowing of the exchange in the crystals of insulin was 
observed by Tuchsen & Ottesen (1979). Recalculation of the data of Wlodawer & 
SjSlin (1982) showed a rate of exchange at least an order of magnitude slower in 
the crystals, after all other effects had been accounted for. Even larger effects 
were observed by Kossiakoff (1982) in his study of trypsin, with a difference of 
several orders of magnitude between the rates of exchange in crystals and in 
solution. The latter results are in the best agreement with our observations for 
BPTI. 


--- PAGE 28 ---
328 A. WLODAWER ET AL. 
A complicating factor in our interpretation of the markedly slower rates of 
exchange, as being due to crystal forces, is the presence of polyethylene glycol in 
the solution surrounding the crystal. The osmotic pressure of 30~o PEG 20,000 is 
of the order of ten atmospheres (1 atm = 101,325 Pa) and thus the activity of 
water inside the crystal is also lowered. It is unlikely, though, that this could 
explain any significant part of the observed effect. 
Differences of actual rates notwithstanding, the agreement between the 
assignment of protected amides derived in this study is in remarkably good 
agreement with the results obtained by two-dimensional n.m.r. It is quite clear 
that if the experiments were to be performed in the reverse order, the availability 
of the neutron diffraction data could have made the task of assignment of n.m.r. 
resonances considerably easier. We are in complete agreement with Wagner (1983) 
about the relative merits of both techniques. Neutron diffraction results are more 
direct and easier to obtain for larger proteins, while n.m.r, is much better suited 
for collecting titration data as a function of parameters such as pH, temperature: 
pressure, etc. We can only hope that these two techniques will be combined more 
often for the studies of such problems in the future (Cohen & Wlodawer, 1982; 
Bentley et al., 1983). 
This paper is dedicated to Professor Paulina Wlodawer on the occasion of her seventieth 
birthday. 
The collaborative aspects of this work have been supported by a North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization research grant (no. 623/83). 
REFERENCES 
Artymiuk, P. J., Blake, C. C. F., Grace, D. E. P., Oatley, S. J., Phillips, D. C. & Sternberg, 
M. J. E. (1979). Nature (London), 280, 563-568. 
Baldwin, R. L. (1978). Trends Biochem. Sci. 3, 66-68. 
Bentley, G. A. & Mason, S. A. (1981). In Structural Studies on Molecules of Biological 
Interest (Dodson, G., Glusker, J. P. & Sayre, D., eds), pp. 246-255, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
Bentley, G. A., Delepierre, M., Dobson, C. M., Wedin, R. E., Mason, S. A. & Poulsen, F. M. 
(1983). J. Mol. Biol. 170, 243-247. 
Blundell, T., Barlow, D., Borkakoti, N. & Thornton, J. (1983). Nature (London), 306, 281- 
283. 
Brooks, B. & Karplus, M. (1983). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 80, 6571-6575. 
Cohen, J. S. & Wlodawer, A. (1982). Trends Biochem. Sci. 7, 389-391. 
Deisenhofer, J. & Steigemann, W. (1975). Acta Crystallogr. sect. B, 31,238-250. 
Diamond° R. (1971). Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 27, 436-452. 
Englander, S. W. & Kallenbach, N. R. (1983). Quart. Rev. Biophys. 16, 521-655. 
Glover, I., Haneef, I., Pitts, J., Wood, S., Moss, D., Tickle, I. & Blundell, T. (1983). 
Biopolymers, 22, 293-304. 
Hamilton, W. C., Rollett, J. S. & Sparks, R. A. (1965). Acta Crystallogr. sect. B, 18, 129- 
130. 
Hanson, J. & Schoenborn, B. P. (1981). J. Mol. Biol. 153, 117-146. 
Hendrickson, W. A. & Konnert, J. H. (1981). In Biomoleeular Structure, Conformation, 
Function, and Evolution (Srinivasan, R., ed.), vo]. 1, pp. 43-47, Pergamon Press, 
Oxford. 
Huber, R. & Kopfmun, G. (1969). Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 25, 143-152. 
Huber, R., Kukla, D., Riihlmann, A., Epp, O. & Formanck, H. (1970). Natur- 
wissenschaften, 57, 389-392. 


--- PAGE 29 ---
STRUCTURE OF TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 329 
Jack, A. & Levitt, M. (1978). Acta Crystaltogr. sect. A, 34, 931-935. 
Jones, T. A. (1978). J. Appl. Crystallogr. 11,268-272. 
Kossiakoff, A. A. (1982). Nature (London), 296, 713-721. 
Kossiakoff, A. A. & Spencer, S. A. (1981). Biochemistry, 20, 6462-6474. 
Kurachi, K., Jensen, L. H. & Sieker, L. C. (1976). J. Mol. Biol. 101, 11-24. 
Levitt, M. (1974). J. Mol. Biol. 82, 393-420. 
Levitt, M. (1981). Nature (London), 294, 379-380. 
Levitt, M. (1983). J. Mol. Biol. 168, 595 617. 
Levitt, M. & Warshel, A. (1975). Nature (London), 253,694 698. 
Marquart, M., Walter, J., Deisenhofer, J., Bode, W. & Huber, 1%. (1983). Acta Crystallogr. 
sect. B, 39, 480-490. 
Mason, S. A., Bentley, G. A. & McIntyre, G. J. (1984). In Neutrons in Biology (Schoenborn, 
B. P., ed.), pp. 323-334, Plenum Press, New York. 
Matthews, B. W. (1977). In The Proteins (Neurath, H. & Hill, R. L., eds), 3rd edit., vol. 3, 
pp. 403-590, Academic Press, New York. 
Nagayama, K. & Wiithrich, K. (1981). Eur. J. Bioehem. 114, 369-374. 
Phillips, S. E. V. & Schoenborn, B. P. (1981). Nature (London), 292, 81-82. 
Prince, E., Wlodawer, A. & Santoro, A. (1978). J. Appl. Crystallogr. 11, 173-178. 
Raghavan, N. V. & Schoenborn, B. P. (1984). In Neutrons in Biology (Schoenborn, B. P., 
ed.), pp. 247-259, Plenum Press, New York. 
Richarz, R., Sehr, P., Wagner, G. & Wiithrich, K. (1979). J. MoI. Biol. 130, 19-30. 
Rosa, J. J. & Richards, F. M. (1979). J. Mol. Biol. 133,399-416. 
Rosa, J. J. & Richards, F. M. (1981). J. Mol. Biol. 145,835-851. 
Sakabe, N., Sakabe, K. & Sasaki, K. (1981). In Structural Studies on Molecules of Biological 
Interest (Dodson, G., Glusker, J. P. & Sayre, D., eds), pp. 509 526, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
SjSlin, L. & Wlodawer, A. (1981). Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 37, 594-604. 
Steigemann, W. (1974). Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universit~t, Mfinchen. 
Sussmann, J. L., Holbrook, S. R., Church, G. M. & Kim, S. (1977). Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 
33, 8O0 8O4. 
Tanaka, S. & Scheraga, H. A. (1975). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 72, 3802 3806. 
Teeter, M. M. & Hendrickson, W. A. (1979). J. Mol. Biol. 127, 219-223. 
Teeter, M. M. & Kossiakoff, A. A. (1984). In Neutrons in Biology (Schoenborn, B, P., ed.), 
pp. 335-348, Plenum Press, New York. 
Tuchsen, E, & Ottesen, M. (1979). Carlsberg Res. Commun. 44, 1 10. 
Wagner, G. (1983). Quart. Rev. Biophys. 16, 1-57. 
Wagner, G. & Wiithrich, K. (1982). J. Mol. Biol. 160, 343-361. 
Walter, J. & Huber, R. (1983). J. Mol. Biol. 167, 911 917. 
Walter, J., Steigemann, W., Singh, T. P., Bartunik, H., Bode, W. & Huber, R. (1982). Acta 
Crystallogr. sect. B, 38, 1462 1472. 
Wlodawer, A. (1980). Acta Crystallogr. sect. B, 36, 1826 183t. 
Wlodawer, A. (1982). Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 40, 115-159. 
Wlodawer, A. & Hendrickson, W. A. (1982). Acta Crystallogr. sect. A, 38, 239 247. 
Wlodawer, A. & SjSlin, L. (1982). Proc. Nat. Aead. Sci., U.S.A. 79, 1418 1422. 
Wlodawer, A. & SjSlin, L. (1983). Biochemistry, 22, 2720-2728. 
Wood, S. P., Pitts, J. E., Blundell, T. L., Tickle, I. J. & Jenkins, J. A. (1977). Eur. J. 
Biochem. 78, 119-126. 
Wiithrich, K., Wider, G., Wagner, G. & Braun, W. (1982). J. Mol. Biol. 155,311-319. 
Edited by A. Klug 
