--- PAGE 1 ---
Computations of Standard Binding Free Energies with Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Yuqing Deng†,§ and Benoıˆt Roux*,†,‡
Biosciences Di Vision, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass A Venue, Argonne, Illinois, and
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Gordon Center for Integrati Ve Sciences, Uni Versity of
Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois
ReceiVed: August 29, 2008; Re Vised Manuscript Recei Ved: October 22, 2008
An increasing number of studies have reported computations of the standard (absolute) binding free energy
of small ligands to proteins using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and explicit solvent molecules that
are in good agreement with experiments. This encouraging progress suggests that physics-based approaches
hold the promise of making important contributions to the process of drug discovery and optimization in the
near future. Two types of approaches are principally used to compute binding free energies with MD
simulations. The most widely known is the alchemical double decoupling method, in which the interaction
of the ligand with its surroundings are progressively switched off. It is also possible to use a potential of
mean force (PMF) method, in which the ligand is physically separated from the protein receptor. For both of
these computational approaches, restraining potentials may be activated and released during the simulation
for sampling efﬁciently the changes in translational, rotational, and conformational freedom of the ligand and
protein upon binding. Because such restraining potentials add bias to the simulations, it is important that
their effects be rigorously removed to yield a binding free energy that is properly unbiased with respect to
the standard state. A review of recent results is presented, and differences in computational methods are
discussed. Examples of computations with T4-lysozyme mutants, FKBP12, SH2 domain, and cytochrome
P450 are discussed and compared. Remaining difﬁculties and challenges are highlighted.
I. Introduction
In recent years, a number of studies have reported computa-
tions of standard (absolute) binding free energy of small ligands
to proteins using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with
explicit solvent molecules. In many ways, the results are in good
agreement with experiments. By this, one means that the
calculated binding free energy is roughly within experimental
variations, and thus a meaningful predicted quantity. The
progress is encouraging and suggests that physics-based ap-
proaches hold the promise of becoming an important predictive
tool for drug discovery and optimization in the near future. The
goal of this article is to review the recent progress computations
of standard binding free energies, contrast the different meth-
odologies that are available, and highlight the remaining
challenges for the future.
Issues of molecular recognition, involving the noncovalent
association of small ligands to large macromolecules with
high afﬁnity and speciﬁcity, play a crucial role in biology
and medicinal chemistry. 1-3 Computational studies can help
elucidate the fundamental principles governing these issues
at the molecular level. Moreover, improving our ability to
screen large databases of compounds in silico to identify
potential lead drug molecules with accurate prediction of
binding afﬁnities could have a great impact on structure-
based drug design. So far, however, computational screening
methods have had only a mixed success rate. In the language
of molecular modeling, ligand screening can be separated
into two loosely deﬁne steps, “docking” and “scoring”. 4 The
docking step aims at predicting the preferred orientation of
the ligand molecule bound to the protein receptor (the ligand
“pose”), and the scoring step aims at predicting the binding
afﬁnity of the ligand for a given ligand orientation. While
docking can proceed successfully via heuristic simpliﬁcations,
the worse shortcomings of ligand screening approaches stem
from the approximate scoring functions.
The fundamental principles controlling ligand binding are
relatively well understood, but scoring often relies on extremely
simpliﬁed approximations in order to achieve the computational
efﬁciency needed to handle large databases. 5-7 Nonetheless, to
have any predictive and practical value, scoring must reﬂect
the binding free energies with sufﬁcient accuracy. Arguably,
physics-based approaches such as free energy perturbation
molecular dynamics (FEP/MD) simulations represent the most
accurate approach to quantitatively characterize the binding free
energy of small ligands with macromolecules. FEP/MD simula-
tions can naturally handle the inﬂuence of solvent and dynamic
ﬂexibility,6 and previous studies indicate that the method is more
reliable than simpler scoring schemes. 8,9
The calculation of free energies is among the most
important applications of biomolecular simulations. 10-13
Initial applications of FEP/MD to biomolecular systems, such
as, for example, the calculations of hydration free energies 14,15
* Corresponding author.
† Argonne National Laboratory.
‡ University of Chicago.
§ Current address: Zymeworks Inc., 540-1385 West 8th Ave., Vancouver,
BC V6H 3V9, Canada.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113, 2234–22462234
10.1021/jp807701h CCC: $40.75  2009 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 01/15/2009
CENTENNIAL FEATURE ARTICLE
Downloaded via UNIV OF CINCINNATI on March 22, 2026 at 22:22:40 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


--- PAGE 2 ---
and of binding free energies, 16-21 go back to the 1980s. The
early work was obviously burdened by the limited sampling
from short simulations, though the potential of FEP methods
was recognized. Considerable progress has been made since
then, in part due to the increased availability of powerful
computers. Moreover, the theoretical framework for carrying
out various free energy computations has been greatly
clariﬁed.
13 In recent years, free energy simulations have been
used to characterize solvation properties of a wide range of
molecules and have now become integral tools to test,
validate, and reﬁne biomolecular force ﬁelds.
22-25 Absolute
hydration free energies were calculated for the amino acids
side chains
26,27 and for a wide range of small molecules. 28-32
Water -cyclohexane transfer free energies of amino acids
have been determined. 33 Decomposition of free energies into
contributions by the core repulsion, van der Waals dispersion,
and electrostatic interactions helps gain insight on the
intermolecular forces underlying solvation properties.
27 While
FEP/MD remains too demanding computationally for screen-
ing extremely large databases of compounds, the recent
success and the increase in computational power suggest that
these methods are going to play an important role in drug
discovery and optimization in the near future.
In the following section, we review brieﬂy the statistical
thermodynamics formulation of molecular association, and
describe the main approaches to compute standard binding
free energies from MD simulations. There is the alchemical
double decoupling method, in which the interaction of the
ligand with its surroundings is progressively switched off,
and there is the potential of mean force method, in which
the ligand is physically separated from the receptor. For both
of these computational strategies, restraining potentials may
be activated and released during the simulation to sample
more efﬁciently the changes in translational, rotational, and
conformational freedom of the ligand and protein upon
binding. A review of recent results is then presented, and
differences in computational methods are discussed. Particular
attention is given to studies of ligand binding to T4-lysozyme
mutants
34-39 and FKBP12. 40-44 Our attention shall be devoted
mainly to the recent advances in the computation of standard
(absolute) binding free energies based on simulations with
explicit solvent. The wide range of scoring methods that are
available for virtual screening are not covered here, as they
have been the object of recent reviews (e.g., see, refs 45 -47).
Similarly, the vast literature concerned with alchemical FEP
calculations of relati Ve free energies will not be reviewed
extensively. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that
familiar FEP techniques, when combined with systematic
explorations of the effect of chemical modiﬁcations of lead
compounds (e.g., heterocycle substitutions, methyl, chlorine,
and hydroxyl scans, etc.), represent a powerful strategy in
drug design (see refs 48 -51 as recent examples). The review
is concluded with a discussion highlighting the remaining
challenges with an outlook to the future.
II. Theory and Methods
A. Statistical Mechanics and Equilibrium Binding Con-
stant. The main quantity of interest is the standard binding free
energy, ∆G
b°. One may note that the term absolute binding free
energy has often been used in theoretical studies, 39,42,44,52-55
largely for the purpose of contrasting ∆Gb° with the relatiVe
free energies that are obtained via standard FEP simulations.10-13
In the following, we shall use the term standard binding free
energy.
To calculate ∆Gb° with computer simulations, a mathematical
relation has to be established between macroscopic observables
and microscopic variables. For the sake of concreteness, let us
consider a protein macromolecule (P) in thermodynamic equi-
librium with a dilute solution containing ligand molecules (L).
The equilibrium constant K
b of the binding reaction L + P h
LP is deﬁned as Kb ) [LP]/([L][P]), where [L], [P], and [LP]
are the equilibrium concentrations of the unbound ligand,
unbound protein, and bound complex, respectively. The standard
binding free energy is deﬁned from the equilibrium constant
by ∆G
b° )- kBT ln(C°Kb), where C° is a standard concentration,
kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature.
To obtain an expression for Kb, it is useful to consider the
occupancy operator H equal to 1, when the ligand is in the
binding site of the protein and 0 otherwise. The probability to
ﬁnd the protein with one ligand bound is P
1 ) 〈H〉, the
probability to ﬁnd the protein with no ligand bound is P 0 ) 1
- P 1, and the ratio of these occupancy probabilities is directly
related to the equilibrium constant, P 1/P 0 ) Kb[L]. This ratio
is independent of the concentration of the protein, as long as
the solution is relatively dilute. Following classical statistical
mechanics, it can be shown that the equilibrium constant can
be expressed as
36,53,56,57
where U is the total potential energy of the system, /betatwo≡ 1/kBT,
L and X represent, respectively, the coordinates of the ligand
and all remaining atoms (solvent and protein), rL is the position
of the center of mass of the ligand, and r* is some arbitrary
position far away in the bulk region.36,55,56 The derivation, which
can be traced back to Bjerrum, 58 is more direct than the
traditional treatments based on chemical potentials. 53,57,59 One
may note that Kb has the dimension of volume, hence the need
to multiply by the standard concentration C° (1 mol/L ) 1/1660
Å3), to deﬁne the dimensionless quantity KbC° and a meaningful
binding free energy ∆Gb°.
On the basis of eq 1, one may picture the binding process as
the ligand leaving the bulk region (in the denominator) and
moving into the binding site (in the numerator). In principle,
the binding free energy could be determined from the average
population of the bound state 〈H〉, via an unbiased trajectory.
However, while this has been done previously (e.g., see ref 60),
Yuqing Deng was born in Mianyang, Sichuan Province, in China in 1973.
He received a B.Sc. in Applied Chemistry from the University of Electronic
Science and Technology (Chengdu, China) in 1994 and obtained a M.Sc.
under the guidance of Zhida Chen in theoretical physical chemistry from
Peking University (Beijing, China) in 1996. He then moved on to Brown
University where he obtained his Ph.D. in 2002 on the mechanism of
polyatomic vibrational relaxation in simple liquids under the direction of
Richard Stratt. During his postdoctoral work with Benoît Roux, he developed
computational methodologies for free energy calculations. He currently
works as a molecular simulation scientist at Zymeworks Inc. (Vancouver,
BC).
Benoît Roux was born in the city of Montréal, Canada, in 1958. In 1981,
he received a B.Sc. in Physics from the University of Montréal, followed
by a M.Sc. in Biophysics in 1985 under the supervision of Rémy Sauvé. In
1990, he obtained a Ph.D. in Biophysics from Harvard University under
the direction of Martin Karplus. In the last decade, he has held positions at
the University of Montréal and the Weill Medical College of Cornell
University. Since 2005, he is Professor in the Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology at the University of Chicago with a joint appointment
as Senior Computational Biologist at Argonne National Laboratory.
Kb )
∫site dL ∫dX e-/betatwoU
∫bulk dL δ(rL - r*) ∫dX e-/betatwoU
(1)
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2235


--- PAGE 3 ---
it is generally more advantageous to introduce a sequence of
intermediate states between the bound and unbound “end-point”
states in order to enable practical computations. The most
popular approaches rely on alchemical free energy thermody-
namic perturbation techniques in which the intermediates are
chosen to progressively switch “off” the interactions of the
ligand with its surroundings.
21,36,42,54,56,57,61 Alternatively, con-
venient intermediates may be chosen to control the physical
separation between the ligand and the protein without alchemical
decoupling. In this approach, the binding constant is computed
via a protein-ligand potential of mean force (PMF).
43,55,62,63 One
may refer to this PMF-based approach as the “pulling” method.43
Such PMF-based approach can also be applied along a 4th
spatial dimension,
64-66 which has some analogy with the soft-
core potentials used in alchemical decoupling. 67 With these
different methods, any number of restraining potentials may be
activated and then released at different stages during the
calculations to improve convergence. As long as the total
reversible work between the end-points is properly calculated,
the ﬁnal result should be independent of the intermediate states.
B. Standard Binding Free Energy from Alchemical Per-
turbation. The alchemical method computes the reversible
thermodynamic work for “decoupling” the ligand from its
surrounding, that is, to switch off all the interaction of the ligand
with the protein and/or bulk solvent. As an illustration, let us
ﬁrst consider the free energy associated with decoupling the
ligand from the bulk solvent
where U
0 represents the total potential energy of the system
with a noninteracting (decoupled) ligand. The thermodynamic
decoupling in eq 2, which corresponds to the transfer of the
ligand to the gas phase, is often referred to as an “annihilation”
process. This could, however, be misconstrued, since the ligand
remains but is only decoupled from its environment. The
solvation free energy in eq 2 can be computed using alchemical
free energy perturbation (FEP) or thermodynamic integration
(TI); by FEP and TI, we mean methods that rely on a ﬁnite or
inﬁnitesimal change in the Hamiltonian, respectively (see refs
11, 68, and 69 for reviews on methodology).
Applying directly the decoupling scheme of eq 2 for the
ligand in the binding site can be attempted,
61 though this is often
impractical. The noninteracting (decoupled) ligand should in
principle drift away from the binding site and wander anywhere
in the volume of the simulation box. This increases the difﬁculty
to obtain a statistically converged and reversible free energy
from standard methods (see the discussion in ref 54). A proper
free energy calculation must be reversible; i.e., the change in
free energy for introducing the ligand molecule into a system
should be equal, but of opposite sign, to the free energy for
removing the ligand. Nevertheless, if one assumes that the ligand
has explored the entire simulation box and the free energy
calculation is converged, then the equilibrium constant follows
from eq 1
where V
pbc is the volume of the box for the periodic boundary
conditions (PBC) used in the MD simulation to calculate ∆Gintsite
and ∆Gintbulk is the solvation free energy deﬁned in eq 2. The
relation to the standard state expressed in eq 3 presumes that
the unrestrained alchemical decoupling state is fully converged,
which would need to be monitored with attention (e.g., the
ligand might get trapped in a metastable site and never return
to the true binding site). Furthermore, using the above expression
assumes implicitly that the ligand binds tightly to the protein
and that the concentration of ligand in the MD box is large
compared to 1/ K
b.
Such difﬁculties are easily avoided by introducing a restrain-
ing potential, ut, at an intermediate step to control the translation
of the ligand relative to the protein binding site. This strategy,
introduced by Hermans and Subramaniam,
21 has been progres-
sively enriched over the years by a number of additional
developments and variants.
34-37,54,56 The restraining potential is
introduced at one end-point to “conﬁne” the uncoupled ligand
within the binding site, and is then “released” at the other end-
point, where this step can be carried out analytically.
21,54,56
Gilson et al. 57 called free energy calculations in which there is
no translational restraint the “double annihilation method”
(DAM) and calculations in which there is a translational restraint
the “double decoupling method” (DDM).
In subsequent developments, restraining potentials have been
introduced to control the ligand rotation,
34,36,37,54conformation,36,42,55
and protein side chain conformation. 38 The various potentials
in FEP are sometimes called “virtual molecular tweezers” 34 or
“virtual bonds”.54 The reversible work for the entire association/
dissociation process is then carried out as a series of sequential
steps, during which the interaction of the ligand with its
surroundings (protein and solvent) as well as the various
restraining potentials are switched “on” and “off”.
42 The
potentials restraining the translation, rotation, and conformation
are denoted by u
t, ur, and uc, respectively. The standard binding
free energy obtained from the step-by-step procedure can be
expressed as
36,42
where ∆∆Gint ) [∆Gintsite - ∆G intbulk], ∆∆Gc ) [∆G cbulk - ∆G csite],
∆∆Gr ) [-∆G rsite - kBT ln(Fr)], and ∆∆Gt° ) [-∆Gtsite -
kBT ln(FtC°)]. ∆Gcsite and ∆Gcbulk are the free energy cost
associated with applying the conformational restraint on the
ligand in the binding site and bulk solvent, F
t and Fr are the
factors associated with applying restraints on ligand rotation
and translation when it is decoupled, ∆G
tsite and ∆Grsite are the
free energy associated with applying restraints in the binding
site, ∆G
intsite is the free energy associated with switching on ligand
interaction in the binding site with all restraint potentials applied,
∆G
intbulk is the free energy associated with switching on ligand
interaction in bulk solvent with conformational restraint poten-
tial. The free energy associated with some of the restraints can
be calculated analytically,
34,54,56 or via a numerical integral.36,42,55
In practice, the potential uc for restraining the conformation of
the ligand has been written as a quadratic form k/ksi2, where /ksiis
the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the ligand relative
to its bound conformation.
36,42,55 Simple dihedral torsion po-
tentials have also been used to conﬁne the conformation of the
protein by restraining the orientation of protein side chains.
38
Equation 4 provides a decomposition of the dominant factors
affecting the binding free energy.
34,36,42 Normally, the interaction
component, ∆∆Gint, is highly favorable but is strongly opposed
by unfavorable contributions from the ligand translation, ∆∆Gt°,
rotation/orientation, ∆∆Gr, and conformation, ∆∆Gc. The
e-/betatwo∆Gintbulk
)
∫dL ∫dX e-/betatwoU
∫dL ∫dX e-/betatwoU0
(2)
Kb ) Vpbc × e-/betatwo[∆Gintsite-∆Gintbulk] (3)
∆Go
b ) ∆∆Gint + ∆∆Got + ∆∆Gr + ∆∆Gc (4)
2236 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux


--- PAGE 4 ---
decomposition can also be used to shed some light on end-
point approximations, such as the explicit/implicit solvent
MM/PB-SA
13,70,71 and the linear interaction energy (LIE). 72,73
The value of the various contributions depends on the details
of the restraint potential and the order in which speciﬁc terms
are activated/deactivated, though the total standard binding free
energy is independent of those factors. The complete DDM
procedure is illustrated schematically in Figure 1.
The various restraining potentials serve as a “guide” to
prevent large excursions of the conﬁgurations of the molecular
system, thus helping to reduce the size of the conﬁgurational
space that needs to be sampled between the end-points of a
free energy calculation. However, there is sometimes the
misperception that computations based on DAM yield more
meaningful (unbiased) results because they do not involve
restraining potentials. This is incorrect. Judiciously chosen
restraining potentials actually enhance sampling efﬁ-
ciency.
37,38,42,55,74-76 Spatial conﬁnement via biasing potentials
is a general noise-reduction technique to aid the convergence
of simulations (see ref 77). While the convergence and revers-
ibility in standard DAM poses a real problem, restraining
potentials may be activated and then released at different stages
during a free energy calculation, as long as their free energy
contributions are properly accounted for.
Any restraining potential that is activated (conﬁne step) must
be deactivated before the end state (release step) in order to
yield properly unbiased results. The effects of switching any
restraining potential on and off may be calculated via standard
TI or FEP, or combined with umbrella sampling
78 to achieve a
higher precision. 36,42,74 Typically, the free energies associated
with ut and ur have been computed directly with FEP or
TI.34-37,42,55 In this case, unbiased simulations are assumed to
be able to achieve sufﬁcient conformational sampling. A more
powerful approach is often needed to treat slow varying degrees
of freedom involving the conformation of the ligand or the
protein. For example, the free energy cost ∆G
cbulk and ∆Gcsite
associated with restraining the conformation of the ligand in
the bulk or in the binding site by the potential uc have been
calculated as
and
where W cbulk(/ksi) and W csite(/ksi) are PMFs of the ligand in the bulk
and in the binding site, respectively. 36,42,55 They must be
calculated with biased simulations via umbrella sampling. A
similar umbrella sampling technique has been utilized by Dill
and co-workers to treat the effect of side chain conﬁgurations
on ligand binding in T4-lysozyme.
38 The above procedure with
eqs 5 and 6 constitutes the basis of what one might call a
“deliberate” sampling strategy: a PMF along some clearly
identiﬁed degree of freedom is ﬁrst calculated with biased
simulations, and then, unbiased averages are extracted via an
explicit numerical integration of the probability distributions
involving the Boltzmann factor of the unbiased PMF. The free
energy difference ∆∆G
c ) [∆Gcapo - ∆Gcholo], corresponding to
the reversible work for switching on a conformational restraint
in one end-point state and switching it off in the other, has been
referred to as a “conﬁne-and-release cycle”.
38
C. Nonpolar and Electrostatics Interactions. A deeper
insight into the microscopic factors driving ligand binding can
be achieved by further dissecting the interaction components
∆G
intsite and ∆Gintbulk according to the character of intermolecular
forces. Intermolecular forces are dominated by short-range harsh
repulsive interactions, arising from Pauli’s exclusion principle,
and long-range van der Waals attraction and electrostatic
interactions, arising, respectively, from quantum mechanical
dispersion and the nonuniform molecular charge distribution.
In standard biomolecular potential functions, the nonpolar forces
are modeled with Lennard-Jones (LJ) 6 -12 potentials, while
electrostatics forces are represented on the basis of Coulomb
interactions between partial charges.
22-25 For example, the
Lennard-Jones 6 -12 potential can be separated into purely
repulsive and attractive parts according to the Weeks-Chandler-
Anderson (WCA) scheme. 27,79 Assuming that the repulsive,
dispersive, and electrostatic components of the interactions are
switched on sequentially, in a step-by-step process, the decou-
pling free energy may be written as
27
where ∆∆Grep ) [∆Grepsite - ∆Grepbulk], ∆∆Gdis ) [∆Gdissite - ∆Gdisbulk],
and ∆∆Gelec ) [∆G elecsite - ∆G elecbulk]. The separation of intermo-
lecular forces in eq 7 provides a useful framework for
decomposing the interaction free energy of a molecular ligand
with its surrounding into distinct contributions with a clear and
well-deﬁned physical meaning. The latter statement must be
understood with caution because the various free energy terms
are conditionally deﬁned via the step-by-step reversible work
in eqs 2 and 7. For example, the free energy ∆G
dis and ∆Gelec
will not be the same if the electrostatic term is switched on
before, or after, the van der Waals dispersion (though the value
of ∆G
b° is invariant).
D. Binding Free Energy from a PMF. The equilibrium
association constant and binding free energy may also be
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the various steps to compute
the standard binding free energy∆Gb° according to the alchemical double
decoupling method (DDM) with restraining potentials as expressed in
eq 4. The complete “path” serves to link the two end-point states: the
unbound state R
aq + Laq with the receptor ( Raq) and the unrestricted
ligand in bulk solvent ( Laq) and the bound state RLaq. In the ﬁgure, Laqc
denotes the restricted ligand in bulk solvent with conformational
restraint, Lvacc denotes the noninteracting decoupled (vacuum) ligand
with conformational restraint, and Lvacc,r denotes the noninteracting ligand
with both conformational and rotational restraint potential (the spring
represents the translational restraint). See ref 36 for a complete
theoretical formulation of each term.
∆Gc
bulk )- kBT ln(
∫d/ksie-/betatwoW cbulk(/ksi)e-/betatwouc(/ksi)
∫d/ksie-/betatwoW cbulk(/ksi) ) (5)
∆Gc
site )- kBT ln(
∫d/ksie-/betatwoW csite(/ksi)e-/betatwouc(/ksi)
∫d/ksie-/betatwoW csite(/ksi) ) (6)
∆∆Gint ) ∆∆Grep + ∆∆Gdis + ∆∆Gelec (7)
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2237


--- PAGE 5 ---
calculated using a PMF, 80,81 without resorting to the alchemical
decoupling steps as in DDM. In simple cases, a strategy based
on the one-dimensional (1D) radial PMF may work
62
where r* is a reference position far away in the bulk. However,
the considerable complexity of biological systems often hinders
the utilization of a straightforward approach. It may be hard to
sample the spherical shell with a ligand at a distance r, required
to utilize eq 8. Furthermore, the conformational freedom of the
ligand may vary considerably between the bound and free states,
which may be difﬁcult to sample with unbiased simulations.
To improve convergence in calculating the PMF, it may be
advantageous to introduce various restraining potentials to limit
the ﬂuctuations of the conformation and orientation of the ligand,
and to conﬁne its translation along a well-deﬁned axis “ a”
relative to the binding site. According to this restrained-PMF
approach, the equilibrium binding constant is expressed in terms
of a 1D integral
55
where w(r) is the 1D-PMF calculated in the presence of the
conﬁgurational and orientational restraints. The quantity S*
corresponds to the effective cross-sectional area swept by the
ligand restrained along the axis “ a” when it is at a distance r*
from the protein. ∆G
asite represents the free energy for restraining
the bound ligand along the 1D axis. The additional factors∆∆Gc
and ∆∆Gr represent the loss of conformational and rotational
freedom of the bound ligand relative to the unbound ligand and
have the same meaning as in eq 4. As with the alchemical
methods described above, restraining potentials of different
shapes may be introduced to carry out a calculation, as long as
their contributions are correctly accounted for in the ﬁnal
equilibrium binding constant.
82 It is illustrated schematically in
Figure 2.
E. Molecular System and Solvation. It is possible to carry
out detailed FEP molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to
calculate the standard binding free energy of a ligand to a
receptor with the theoretical framework presented above. For
meaningful results, one must accurately simulate the thermal
ﬂuctuations and the environment-mediated interactions arising
in diverse and complex systems (i.e., the bulk solution and the
protein binding site). Computational approaches at different
levels of complexity and sophistication have been used to
describe the inﬂuence of solvent on biomolecular systems.
83
Those range from MD simulations based on all-atom models
with PBC, in which the solvent is treated explicitly, to
continuum electrostatic models in which the inﬂuence of the
solvent is incorporated implicitly. Conducting all-atom FEP/
MD simulations is, however, often prohibitive, and it is
important to seek ways to reduce the computational cost of the
calculations. An intermediate approach was developed, com-
bining some aspects of both explicit and implicit solvent
treatments.
84-86 It consists of simulating a nonperiodic system
with a small number of explicit solvent molecules in the vicinity
of a region of interest, while representing the inﬂuence of the
surrounding solvent with an effective “solvent boundary po-
tential”. Many of our own free energy studies
27,36,42 based on
reduced atomic systems were simulated using the spherical
solvent boundary potential (SSBP)
85 for the bulk solvent and
the generalized solvent boundary potential (GSBP) for the
binding site.86 The SSBP and GSBP are mixed explicit/implicit
models: a detailed atomic model of the ligand and its nearest
neighbors is simulated explicitly, while the inﬂuence of the rest
of the system is incorporated implicitly via a mean-ﬁeld
continuum electrostatic approximation. Several mixed explicit/
implicit schemes have been derived through ad hoc assumptions.
In contrast, SSBP and GSBP have been formulated from a
rigorous statistical mechanical reduction of the many-body
conﬁgurational integrals.
85,86 SSBP includes the reaction ﬁeld
from the dielectric response of the solvent acting on the atoms
of the simulation region, while GSBP includes the reaction ﬁeld
for a solvent region of arbitrary geometry, as well as the solvent-
shielded static ﬁeld from the distant atoms of the protein
receptor. Simulations of a reduced system embedded into a
continuum mean-ﬁeld environment offer an attractive strategy
to decrease the computational cost of MD/FEP simulations.
Computationally, this can be very advantageous because binding
speciﬁcity is often dominated by local interactions in the vicinity
of the ligand while the remote regions of the receptor contribute
only in an average manner. Nevertheless, one must be cautious
with these approaches, particularly when the protein macro-
molecule undergoes a large conformational change upon ligand
binding.
III. Overview of Recent Results
A number of well-characterized ligand-binding protein sys-
tems have been the object of intense scrutiny, including mutants
of T4-lysozyme (T4L),
87,88 the FK506 binding protein
(FKBP12),40-44 cytochrome P450, 52,89 and SH2 domains. 90-92
While current studies ultimately are aimed at clarifying the
fundamental principles driving molecular association, they also
serve in large part as “testing grounds” to highlight and address
critical issues with the various computational methodologies.
Some of the most interesting and useful model systems to
investigate noncovalent binding have been provided by mutants
of T4-lysozyme (T4L) in which artiﬁcial cavities were
engineered.
87,88 A hydrophobic cavity, created by the mutation
Kb ) ∫site 4πr2 dr e-/betatwo[w(r)-w(r*)] (8)
Kb ) S*e-/betatwo[∆∆Gc+∆∆Gr-∆Gasite]
∫site dr e-/betatwo[w(r)-w(r*)] (9)
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the various steps to compute
the standard binding free energy ∆Gb° according to a potential of mean
force (PMF) method with restraining potentials as expressed in eq 9.
The complete “path” serves to link the two end-point states: the unbound
state R
aq + Laq with the receptor ( Raq) and the unrestricted ligand in
bulk solvent ( Laq) and the bound state RLaq. In the ﬁgure, Laqc denotes
the conﬁguration restricted ligand in bulk solvent,Laqc,o denotes the ligand
with both conﬁguration and orientation restraints, and Laqc,o,a denotes the
ligand in the bulk with all conﬁgurational, orientational, and axial
restraint potentials. ∆G
abulk and ∆Gbulkfsite are related to S* and an
integral over the ligand -receptor PMF in eq 9, respectively. See ref
55 for a complete theoretical formulation of each term.
2238 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux


--- PAGE 6 ---
L99A in T4L, has been found to bind nonpolar aromatic
molecules such as benzene and indole. 87,93 Polar derivatives of
benzene like phenol do not bind to this nonpolar pocket. 87 The
double mutation M102Q-L99A provides a hydrogen bond
partner for the ligand, thus making the cavity able to bind more
polar ligands.
88 T4L/L99A with bound benzene is illustrated in
Figure 3. The T4L systems have been the object of several
computational studies.
34-39 By virtue of their simplicity, these
systems are particularly attractive for computational studies. The
binding sites are buried inside the protein and not directly
accessible to the bulk solvent. In addition, the cavities are
believed to be essentially “dry” in the holo state; i.e., no solvent
molecules are displaced upon ligand binding.
Another system that has been extensively studied is the
FK506 binding protein (FKBP12).
40-44 There is a vast collection
of ligands which are real drug molecules displaying considerable
ﬂexibility. Furthermore, the binding site exposed to the bulk
and solvent molecules must be displaced upon ligand binding.
The FKBP12 system is also of extreme importance for immu-
nosuppression because the binding of the drug FK506 to
FKBP12 forms a complex that inhibits calcineurin and blocks
the signal transduction pathway for T-cell activation.
94,95 One
ligand included in a previous study 42 is shown in Figure 4.
Although FKBP12 is a small rigid protein that does not undergo
very large ﬂuctuations, this system is considerably more complex
than the simple pockets engineered in T4L.
A. Computational Methodologies. Relatively few studies
have been based on PMF-based approaches. Those include the
original study of amide association by Jorgensen,
62 the binding
of K + into the gramicidin A channel, 63 the binding of the
peptides to signaling modules, 90,92 and ligands of FKBP12. 43
The greatest advantage of a PMF approach is to avoid the
alchemical decoupling (or annihilation) of the ligand with its
surrounding. In that sense, the PMF method imitates roughly
the bimolecular association/dissociation process whereby the
ligand moves along a reaction path from the binding site to the
bulk solution. This is particularly useful if a ligand is charged
and its solvation free energy is very large.
55,63,92 The issue is
well illustrated by the calculation of the binding free energy of
a phosphotyrosyl peptide, Ace-pYEEI, to the Src homology 2
(SH2) domain of Lck kinase. 55 Figure 5 shows the SH2 domain
with bound phosphotyrosyl peptide. An alchemical FEP strategy
is essentially impractical in this case because the solvation free
energy of the ligand is on the order of -800 kcal/mol.
55 Even
if the statistical uncertainty of a DDM calculation was only about
1% of the total solvation free energy, that would still translate
into an error that is of the same order of magnitude as the
quantity of interest itself. Using a restrained-PMF approach, the
computed standard binding free energy is-8.8 kcal/mol, in good
accord with the experimental value of -7.1 kcal/mol.
55
PMF-based approaches become less practical if the binding
site is deeply buried and a simple path for ligand association
cannot be found. In this case, alchemical decoupling free energy
techniques are more effective. For this reason, the majority of
binding free energy calculations has been carried out using
alchemical decoupling approaches. A large number of computa-
tions on a wide range of systems based on DAM have been
reported. However, with a few exceptions, the signiﬁcance of
those results is unclear due to unresolved issues of convergence
Figure 3. T4-lysozyme L99A mutant with benzene bound in the cavity.
The gray parts are treated as a mean-ﬁeld approximation with
generalized solvent boundary potential.
86 See ref 36 for computational
details.
Figure 4. FKBP12 bound with ligand #8 studied previously. 40,42 The
gray parts are treated as a mean-ﬁeld approximation with generalized
solvent boundary potential.
86 See ref 42 for computational details.
Figure 5. SH2 domain with bound peptide pYEEI. The system was
simulated with PBC, and water is not shown for clarity. See ref 55 for
computational details.
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2239


--- PAGE 7 ---
and reversibility. The study of FKPB12 ligands by Fujitani and
co-workers based on DAM is of particular interest because
extensive efforts were made to achieve convergence and
reversibility in the calculations.
41 The connection to the standard
state expressed in eq 3 was not speciﬁed, and the calculated
binding free energies were empirically shifted by an offset
constant for comparison with experiments. In a study of the
same system, Pande and co-workers used an approach with some
similarities to both DAM and DDM.
44 The simulation sampled
a full decoupled state with the ligand wandering anywhere in
the box, but only the conﬁgurations with the ligand within a
small subvolume near the binding site were included in the free
energy. This analysis made it possible to specify the connection
with the standard state. Generally, however, DDM with
translational restraints appears to be more advantageous than
DAM in terms of its ability to yield well-converged and
reversible results that can be related unambiguously to the
standard state. Computations based on DDM have been carried
out for a variety of systems. DDM has been used to characterize
water occupancy in protein cavities,
56,96,97 and examine the
binding of ligands to the T4L mutants, 34-39 FKBP12,40-44 and
cytochrome P450.52,89 The latter system has been used to test a
method combining DDM with a grand canonical Monte Carlo
(GCMC) algorithm to account for the change in water oc-
cupancy in the buried cavity.
89
B. Salient Contributions to the Binding Free Energy.
While there is deﬁnitely room for improvement, it is fair to say
that the results from many of the computational studies are in
good agreement with experiments. It is clear that current
computational approaches are sufﬁciently accurate to yield
meaningful observations about the microscopic factors govern-
ing ligand binding. In the following, we review the most
important conclusions drawn from the different computational
studies.
1. Ligand -Receptor Interactions. One advantage of the
alchemical approach based on DDM is the possibility to dissect
the nonbonded interaction of the ligand with its surrounding
(protein or solvent). Computing the reversible work in a step-
by-step procedure makes it possible to separate the interaction
free energy into repulsive, dispersive, and electrostatic compo-
nents based on eq 7. The decomposition provides important
insight into the microscopic forces driving ligand binding
(keeping in mind the caveat that each term represents a
conditional free energy contribution associated with the step-
by-step reversible work to carry out the full process).
As an illustration, Tables 1 and 2 show the results for the
T4L cavities and FKBP12, respectively, taken from our previous
studies.
36,42 The free energy decomposition indicates that both
the LJ-core repulsion and dispersion contribute favorably to the
binding free energy. In the case of nonpolar ligand binding to
T4L/L99A, the favorable contribution from the core repulsion
is consistent with the idea that the protein provides an empty
cavity that is preformed for ligand binding. Essentially, no
reversible work is needed to insert the repulsive core of the
ligand into the protein binding site. In the case of FKBP12, the
repulsive component is still favorable but much smaller (Table
2). The main difference with T4L can be understood by the
location of the binding site. The binding pocket of FKBP12 is
at the protein surface, whereas the binding site in T4L mutants
is located deep inside the protein core. For FKBP12, there is
no preformed empty cavity to bind the ligand and the repulsive
interaction does not make a strong contribution to the free
energy.
Interestingly, van der Waals dispersive interaction makes a
systematically favorable contribution to the binding free energy,
both in the case of T4L and FKBP12; i.e., dispersion is more
favorable when the ligand is in the binding site than when it is
in the bulk solvent. The origin of the difference can be directly
traced back to the number density of van der Waals interaction
centers per unit volume surrounding the ligand. The density is
invariably larger in a protein environment than in bulk water.
A similar observation was made by Levy and co-workers in
developing implicit solvent models.
98 The large dispersive
contribution is correlated with the number of non-hydrogen
atoms in the ligand. This observation agrees with the empirical
observation that, barring large shape change, binding increased
by adding heavy atoms to a ligand.
99 Furthermore, one may
note that the contribution from the van der Waals dispersion to
the binding free energy is almost equal to the average van der
Waals dispersion of the ligand with its surrounding in the bound
state minus the average van der Waals dispersion of the unbound
ligand with the bulk solvent. This clariﬁes the circumstances
for which the difference in simple end-point averages may be
a useful indicator for assessing the relative afﬁnity of series of
ligands with a similar shape.
Ligand speciﬁcity is strongly affected by the polarity of the
cavity.
39,88 This is well illustrated by contrasting the afﬁnity of
benzene and phenol for the T4L cavities engineered in the L99A
and the M102Q-L99A mutants. As shown in Table 1, the free
energy calculation is able to identify phenol as a binder of T4L/
M102Q-L99A and as a nonbinder of T4L/L99A. In contrast,
benzene binds to both the T4L/L99A and T4L/M102Q-L99A
cavities. As the free energy decomposition shows, the nonpolar
contribution for phenol is comparable to that of similar sized
binding ligands, and it is only the high desolvation penalty from
electrostatics that lowers its afﬁnity for the L99A cavity. The
M102Q-L99A double mutant provides a polar group that helps
stabilize phenol electrostatically. This explains why phenol binds
to the M102Q-L99A double mutant of T4L but not to the single
mutant L99A.
2. Restriction of Ligand Motion. The loss of motional
freedom of the ligand is intuitively associated with the concept
of entropy. However, estimating changes in entropy accurately
from simulations is very difﬁcult,
28,100 and schemes to partition
the entropy into particular motions involve further approxima-
tions.
101 Alternatively, the reversible work associated with the
activation and release of restraining potentials can be utilized
to estimate directly the loss of free energy associated with the
loss of motional freedom upon binding. While such estimates
depend on the speciﬁc pathway for decoupling the ligand, they
can provide useful insight on the various contributions to the
TABLE 1: Binding Free Energy for the T4L Cavities
ligand ∆∆Grep ∆∆Gdis ∆∆Gelec ∆∆G t° + ∆∆Gr ∆Gbind° exptl
L99A Nonpolar Site
benzene -4.73 -7.43 0.69 5.42 -5.96 -5.19
phenol -4.58 -8.19 4.35 7.55 -0.88
L99A-M102Q Polar Site a
benzene -4.37 -8.53 0.51 6.78 -5.61
phenol -4.06 -9.74 -0.32 8.52 -5.64 -5.55
a Deng and Roux, unpublished result.
TABLE 2: Binding Free Energy for Ligand 8 of FKBP12
∆∆Grep ∆∆Gdis ∆∆Gelec ∆∆G c ∆∆G t° ∆∆Gr ∆Gbind° exptl
-1.1 -21.1 -3.7 6.9 3.4 5.4 -10.2 -10.9
a Note that ∆∆Grep + ∆∆Gdis + ∆∆Gelec )- 25.9 kcal/mol, and
∆∆Gc + ∆∆Gt° + ∆∆Gr + 15.7 kcal/mol.
2240 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux


--- PAGE 8 ---
binding free energy. 34,36 On the basis of an analysis with the
restraining potential, the loss of translational freedom yields a
free energy ∆∆G
t° )- kBT ln(C°∆V), where ∆V is an effective
accessible volume for the center of mass of the ligand in
the binding site. The microscopic volume ∆V is normally on
the order of ∼1Å
3, which yields the well-known standard state
offset factor -kBT ln(C°∆V) of 4.4 kcal/mol. Thus, the reduction
in translational freedom of the ligand almost invariably makes
an unfavorable contribution to the binding free energy. On the
basis of a similar analysis with the restraining potential, the
loss of rotational freedom translates into a free energy ∆∆G
r )
-kBT ln(∆Ω/8π2), where ∆Ω is the magnitude of the orienta-
tional ﬂuctuations of the ligand. Because the factor ∆Ω/8π2 is
typically much smaller than 1, the reduction in rotational
freedom of the ligand always makes a considerable unfavorable
contribution to binding free energy. Therefore, reduction in both
translational and orientational freedom yields unfavorable
contributions to the binding free energy. Interestingly, ∆V and
∆Ω can be related to the dynamical ﬂuctuations of the bound
ligand. This can be exploited to clarify the signiﬁcance of end-
point approximations, in which the translational and orientational
contributions are often estimated using a quasi-harmonic
approximation.
57,70,71 For the T4L systems, roughly 5 -9 kcal/
mol arises from the loss of translational and rotational freedom
of the ligand.
36 For the FKBP12 ligands, the loss of translation
corresponds roughly to 3.5 kcal/mol and the loss of rotation
corresponds roughly to 4.5 -5.5 kcal/mol.
42
Except for small and rigid ligands, one expects a reduction
of internal ligand ﬂexibility upon binding. The free energy
associated with the loss of conformational freedom of the ligand,
∆∆G
c, is the reversible work ﬁrst to conﬁne the ligand near its
bound (reference) conformation with the restraining potential
when it is in the bulk solvent ( ∆G
cbulk) and then to release it
freely when it is in the binding site ( ∆Gcsite).36,42,55 The confor-
mational restraining potential was written in terms of the rmsd
of the ligand relative to its bound conformation, and the
calculation proceeded via the PMF of the ligand in the bulk
and in the binding site; see eqs 5 and 6. Upon binding to the
SH2 domain, there is a loss of conformational freedom of the
phosphotyrosyl-peptide ligand which gives rise to an unfavor-
able free energy of about 2 kcal/mol.
55 In the case of the ﬂexible
FK506-related ligands, the conformational free energy of the
ligand varies from 1 to 7 kcal/mol;
42 it is 6.9 kcal/mol for ligand
8 (see Table 2). The utilization of a PMF to control the
conformation of the ligand is useful to obtain more accurate
estimates of the solvation free energy of the ligand, in cases
when a direct decoupling scheme without conformational
restraints would fail due to incomplete sampling.
In summary, the loss of motional freedom plays a key role
in the resulting binding free energy. As a result, a large fraction
of the total (favorable) contribution from the ligand -protein
interaction is opposed by the (unfavorable) contribution arising
from the loss of translational, orientational, and conformational
freedom of the ligand. In the case of benzene shown in Table
1, about half of the total interaction free energy ( -11.52 kcal/
mol) is canceled by the loss of motional freedom upon binding
(5.42 kcal/mol). In the case of the FK506-related ligand shown
in Table 2, the interaction free energy of almost -26 kcal/mol
is opposed by +15.7 kcal/mol of unfavorable contributions from
the translational, orientational, and conformational loss, yielding
a net binding free energy of only -10.2 kcal/mol. Even though
FKBP12 itself is relatively rigid, about 60% of all the favorable
interaction free energy of -26 kcal/mol is actually opposed by
unfavorable contributions that are often ignored or discarded
in simple scoring schemes. This has important implications for
end-point methods
57,70,71 and for the parametrization of empirical
scoring functions that are adjusted to estimate the binding free
energy from one ﬁxed conﬁguration.
4
3. Conformation of the Protein. Large conformational
changes in the protein are expected to be an important
component of the binding free energy. However, even seemingly
minor conformation changes can have a considerable impact
on the calculated binding free energy. A case in point is the
orientation of the Val111 side chain in the T4L/L99A system.
In the bound complexes with the small- and medium-size ligands
(e.g., benzene, toluene), the protein structure is not strongly
affected and the side chain of Val111 adopts a conformation
similar to that in the apo structure. The calculated binding free
energies for the small nonpolar ligands are generally in excellent
agreement with experiments.
36,39 Difﬁculties arise in the case
of larger ligands (e.g., indene, n-butylbenzene, isobutylbenzene,
o-xylene, p-xylene). The side chain of Val111, which is in direct
contact with the bound ligand, changes its rotameric states from
a t conformation (/khi
1 ) 180°) for the ligand-free or -bound state
with small ligands, to a g- conformation ( /khi1 )- 60°) for the
bound state with large ligands. The energy barrier around the
/khi
1 torsion is sufﬁcient to prevent the Val111 side chain from
rotating on the time scale of typical simulations, and the free
energy for decoupling the ligand starting from the holo
conformation is not correctly accounted for. As a result,
calculated standard binding free energies are too favorable by
2-3 kcal/mol when the DDM calculations are initiated directly
from the ligand-bound structure of the protein.
36 Additional
difﬁculties were also noted in the case of indene, for which the
side chain rotamer of Val111 in the crystallographic X-ray
structure of the bound complex (PDB 183L) might be incorrect
36
(but see also refs 38 and 39). While the problems with Val111
can be resolved by adopting a deliberate sampling strategy
involving the calculation of the PMF for the /khi
1 dihedral angle
of the side chain via umbrella sampling,39 the quantitative impact
of a single protein side chain on the calculated binding free
energies is truly sobering. Whether a rotameric state is incorrect
in the X-ray structure,
36 or insufﬁciently sampled in free energy
simulations,39 the consequences can amount to an error of
several kilocalories per mole. This highlights the importance
of having accurate structural models for the calculations, and
the importance of sampling all of the relevant degrees of
freedom.
4. Binding Site Hydration. While the solvent conﬁgurations
are generated spontaneously by MD when the binding site is
exposed to the bulk phase, sampling difﬁculties become
particularly acute when a binding site is deeply buried and
inaccessible. In this case, the exchange of water molecules with
the bulk region may be very slow, and the accuracy of free
energy perturbation (FEP) calculations based on unbiased MD
trajectories is severely compromised. Several theoretical studies
have speciﬁcally examined the thermodynamics stability of
water molecules in buried protein cavities
56,96,97,102-104 and their
impact on the thermodynamics of ligand binding. 105-107 Ligand
binding often disrupts the hydration of the binding site. 108-110
A particularly challenging example is provided by cytochrome
P450, a monooxygenase that oxidizes endogenous and xeno-
biotic substrates.
52,89 Simulation studies have shown that some
conformational change is required to open up a channel,
allowing exchange between the cavity and the bulk phase,
111-113
and about ﬁve water molecules must be expelled from the deeply
buried cavity upon the binding of camphor. Such a change in
hydration state must be captured in free energy calculations to
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2241


--- PAGE 9 ---
yield accurate and meaningful results. In a previous study, Wade
and co-workers designed an alchemical transformation com-
bining the annihilation of ﬁve water molecules together with
insertion of the ligand in the cavity.
52 While the strategy can
produce accurate results, it requires prior knowledge of the
number of water molecules to annihilate in the cavity. Figure 6
shows the buried binding site in p450, and the impact on water
occupancy upon camphor binding. The binding of camphor to
cytochrome P450 was studied using a free energy method
combining MD with a grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC)
algorithm
90,114,115 to account for the change in water occupancy
in the buried cavity during the alchemical free energy calcula-
tion.
89 In this context, the reversible free energy work to
alchemically decouple the bound ligand can be expressed in
terms of standard TI
89
where Pn(λ) denotes the probability of n solvent molecules
occupying the binding pocket, the bracket 〈··· 〉λ,n means a
constrained average with a ﬁxed number of solvent molecules
in the binding pocket. The double bracket implies a GCMC
average over the number of solvent molecules. The calculated
binding free energy for camphor to P450 is -8.25 kcal/mol, in
good agreement with the experimental value of -7.75 kcal/
mol.
52 In contrast, calculations with a ﬁxed water conﬁguration
(holo or apo) give results with huge errors. When the calculation
is carried out with the water molecules of the apo state, then
the ligand has to push its way into the cavity and the resulting
free energy is +12.60 kcal/mol, which is incorrect by almost
20 kcal/mol. On the other hand, when the calculation is carried
out with the water molecules of the holo state, then there is a
preformed empty cavity to receive the ligand and the resulting
free energy is -14.25 kcal/mol, which is now too favorable by
about 6 kcal/mol.
C. Putting Binding Free Energy Calculations to the Test.
While many of the recent studies demonstrate that free energy
simulations provide a satisfying physics-based perspective of
ligand binding,
34,36-44,54,89,90 it is important to ascertain the
accuracy and predictive power that can be achieved with current
methods.
One particularly nice study recently combined both computa-
tions and experiments to examine the binding of a large number
of ligands to the nonpolar L99A cavity of T4L.
39 In retrospective
tests, computed standard binding free energies for 13 ligands
had an rms error of about 1.9 kcal/mol relative to previously
determined experimental values. In blind prospective tests,
binding orientations and afﬁnities were predicted for a set of
ﬁve uncharacterized compounds identiﬁed by docking as
putative binders. The calculations discriminated between several
true binders and decoys, recognized the one nonbinder, ac-
curately predicted ligand-bound orientations, correctly ranked
the ligand-binding afﬁnities, and quantitatively predicted binding
free energies. The main conclusions from this extensive effort
are that alchemical free energy methods are more accurate than
docking, are able to distinguish binders from nonbinders, and
can make successful predictions of bound orientations and
binding afﬁnities.
39 The authors also noted that accounting for
protein conformational change via deliberate sampling of the
rotameric state of the side chain of Val111 was important for
accuracy.
There have also been some extensive studies of the ligand
binding FKPB12.
40-42 This system is more difﬁcult to manipu-
late than T4L, but it has the virtue of being representative of a
real pharmaceutical target binding drug-like compounds. Com-
puted binding free energies for a series of 8 FK506-related
Figure 6. Binding site of cytochrome p450 with camphor. In part A is an overview of the simulation system with the buried binding site. In part
B, the binding site is not visible with a space-ﬁlling representation. In part C, the site with no camphor is occupied by water, and in part D, camphor
is bound. See ref 89 for theoretical formulation and computational details.
∆G ) ∫0
1
dλ ∑
n
Pn(λ)〈
∂W
∂λ 〉λ,n
) ∫0
1
dλ 〈〈
∂W
∂λ 〉〉λ
(10)
2242 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux


--- PAGE 10 ---
ligands display an average rms error of about 2 -2.5 kcal/mol
relative to previously determined experimental values. 40-42
Recent results on the same series with more extensive sampling
show some improvement, with an rms error of about 1.4 kcal/
mol.
44 Therefore, the results of retrospective tests on FKBP12
are now approaching an accuracy similar to that of T4L. It is
worth noting that some of the results have been obtained from
simulations of a fully solvated protein with PBC,
40,41,44 and some
were based on a reduced system embedded in a GSBP mean-
ﬁeld surrounding.
42
Recently, we have used free energy methods to participate
in the OpenEye statistical assessment of the modeling of proteins
and ligands (SAMPL) challenge.
116 In a blind test, the binding
free energies of 50 neutral compounds to the JNK kinase were
computed. The coordinates of all of the protein -ligand com-
plexes were provided, so the purpose of this effort is to test the
performance of standard binding free energy computations as
a scoring strategy. Figure 7 shows the JNK kinase bound in
complex with ligand 19. The computations were carried out
according to a previously published protocol;
89 details are given
in the caption. Most of the jobs were set up and submitted via
automated scripts with default protonation states for the protein
residues, trying to minimize human intervention as much as
possible. Figure 8 shows the enrichment plot. Though there are
clearly some false positives and false negatives, it shows a good
separation of the binding and nonbinding compounds. Among
the 50 compounds, the free energy computations correctly
predicted 2 of the top 5 binders, as well as 6 of the 10 worst
binders. Five out of nine nonactive compounds were also
correctly identiﬁed. The computed binding free energies range
from -16 to -3 kcal/mol, while the experimental values range
from -8.6 to -5.5 kcal/mol. The error in some cases is
considerable; e.g., the computed binding free energy for ligand
10 is -15.7 kcal/mol, whereas the experimental value is -8.7
kcal/mol. Thus, the binding afﬁnity is strongly overestimated
for a number of ligands, though this does not undermine the
usefulness of the ranking itself. On the basis of the lessons from
T4L, it is likely that this is caused by an inadequate sampling
of the conformational changes in the protein.
36,39
IV. Outlook
The theoretical foundations for the computation of standard
binding free energies are well established. One can broadly
choose between alchemical free energy perturbation methods,
in which the ligand is decoupled progressively from its
surrounding, and PMF-based methods, in which the ligand is
pulled away from the binding site. The former are preferable
in the case of ligands that bind to buried sites and cavities, while
the latter are more advantageous for charged ligands that bind
to the surface of a protein. For both of these computational
approaches, various restraining potentials may be activated and
released during the simulation to enhance and aid conﬁgurational
sampling. While there is ample room for improvement, the
recent studies demonstrate that standard binding free energy
computations could be applied with success to increasingly
challenging problems.
Computations of standard binding free energies provide an
ultimate test, informing us about the ability of current compu-
tational methods to address issues of molecular recognition. In
particular, the recent efforts have served to expose many of the
approximations and shortcomings that often can be ignored or
disregarded in calculations of relative free energies. On the other
hand, it is important to point out that alchemical calculations
of relative free energies, with their slightly more modest and
practical goals, are already in a position to play an important
role in drug design and lead optimization.
51
The treatment of very large conformational changes in the
receptor induced by ligand binding remains one of the biggest
challenge in calculations of standard binding free energies.
Striking examples are provided by the HIV protease,
117-119 or
ligand-activated membrane receptors such as the ionotropic
glutamate receptor (iGluR).
120,121 In principle, an adequate
sampling of conformational changes could be achieved via
exceedingly long unbiased MD simulations, though this ap-
proach rapidly becomes computationally prohibitive. At the
present time, one must rely on a deliberate sampling strategy
of the relevant degrees of freedom,
36,38,39,42,90,92 and thus on some
prior identiﬁcation of those degrees of freedom. In practice, this
requires calculating a PMF along some chosen order parameter
with biased simulations. In some cases, the order parameter may
be relatively simple, such as the dihedral angle used to control
the rotameric state of Val111 in the T4L/L99A system,
38 or
could be relatively complicated, such as the combination of
interdomain distances used to control the large conformational
Figure 7. JNK kinase bound with ligand 19 from the OpenEye
statistical assessment of the modeling of proteins and ligands (SAMPL)
challenge.
116 The gray parts are treated as a mean-ﬁeld approximation
with generalized solvent boundary potential. The computations were
carried out according to the same protocol presented in previous
studies.
89
Figure 8. Cumulative percentage of enrichmentf(n) plotted as a function
of ligand number n, given by f(n) ) 100 ∑ in ∑ jn δ[Lexptl(i), Lcalcd(j)]/n,
(1 e n e N), where δ[k, l] is a Kroenecker delta,N ) 50, and Lexptl(i) and
Lcalcd(j) are the experimental and calculated lists of the N ligands ordered
in decreasing afﬁnity, respectively. The top ﬁve ligands from the computa-
tions are 40, 27, 10, 47, and 8; the experimental top ﬁve are10,1 , 27, 11,
and 38. The worse 10 ligands from the computations are 9, 43, 51, 6, 5,
21, 23, 56, 31, and 17; the experimental worst 10 are 51,4 , 5, 6, 17, 23,
29, 30, 36, and 43.
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2243


--- PAGE 11 ---
change induced by the binding of glutamate to iGluR. 121 The
rmsd relative to a reference conformation is a useful order
parameter to control a ﬂexible ligand.
36,42,55 Extending the rmsd
to a protein macromolecule is possible 122,123 but limited. A
general approach for mapping arbitrarily complex conforma-
tional changes onto a simple order parameter is lacking at
present. This is currently an outstanding problem in computa-
tional biophysics.
124 It may be possible to make progress with
the advance of methods aimed at ﬁnding the reaction path
between the conformations of a macromolecular system.
124-127
The treatment of large protein conformation remains an
outstanding issue in binding free energy calculations.
Apart from issues of conformational sampling, it is important
to recall that the accuracy of computations is determined
ultimately by the underlying atomic force ﬁeld. Because they
depend on a free energy difference between the bound and
unbound states, computations can beneﬁt from a cancelation of
errors. For example, the standard binding free energy will remain
roughly correct even if the van der Waals interaction of a ligand
with the solvent and with the protein deviate systematically from
the correct values. Nevertheless, dependable results will require
that the force ﬁeld represents the ligand, the protein, and the
solvent as accurately as possible. Current biomolecular force
ﬁelds with ﬁxed partial charges, such as CHARMM,
22 AM-
BER,23 OPLS,24 and GAFF 25 with the AM1-BCC charge
model,128,129 provide atomic models able to yield solvation free
energies that are in reasonably good agreement with experiments
for amino acids and a wide range of small molecules.
26,27,29-31
Nonetheless, it is clear that it will be necessary to take the effect
of induced electronic polarizability into account to achieve
reliable results of high accuracy.
130 Additional complexities
somewhat related to the force ﬁeld include, among other factors,
changes in protonation states upon binding,
131 and the existence
of tautomers132 will require special attention. In considering the
accuracy of various force ﬁelds in the future, it will be helpful
to draw more clearly the distinction between extremely rapid
automatic assignment of force ﬁeld parameters for an arbitrary
ligand aimed at large database screening
25,128 and more com-
putationally intensive physics-based approaches aimed at gen-
erating models of high accuracy.
133
The computational methods are now approaching the point
where making accurate prediction and addressing issues of
molecular recognition will be achievable. While there is still
much to be done, the methods are already bearing fruits and
the path toward progress is very clear.
Acknowledgment. We would like to thank Hideaki Fujitani,
Vijay Pande, Michael Shirts, David Mobley, Ken Dill, Devleena
Shivakumar, Hyung-Jun Woo, and Jiayao Wang for their help.
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
through Grant MCB-0630140. This work was supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Ofﬁce of Basic Energy
Sciences, under Contract no. DE-AC02-06CH11357, and by
Grant no. 2006-264-R2 from the Laboratory-Directed Research
and Development (LDRD) program at Argonne National
Laboratory.
References and Notes
(1) Vindigni, A. Energetic dissection of speciﬁcity in serine proteases.
Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screening 1999, 2, 139–153.
(2) Cheng, A. C.; Calabro, V.; Frankel, A. D. Design of RNA-binding
proteins and ligands. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2001, 11 (4), 478–484.
(3) Garvie, C. W.; Wolberger, C. Recognition of speciﬁc DNA
sequences. Mol. Cell 2001, 8 (5), 937–946.
(4) Shoichet, B. Virtual screening of chemical libraries. Nature 2004,
432, 862–865.
(5) Shoichet, B.; Leach, A.; Kuntz, I. Ligand solvation in molecular
docking. Proteins 1999, 34, 4–16.
(6) Carlson, H.; Masukawa, K.; Rubins, K.; Bushman, F.; Jorgensen,
W.; Lins, R.; Briggs, J.; McCammon, J. Developing a dynamic pharma-
cophore model for HIV-1 integrase. J. Med. Chem. 2000, 43, 2100–2114.
(7) Schneider, G.; Bohm, H. J. Virtual screening and fast automated
docking methods. Drug Disco Very Today 2002, 7 (1), 64–70.
(8) Price, D.; Jorgensen, W. Computational binding studies of human
pp60c-src SH2 domain with a series of nonpeptide, phosphophenyl-
containing ligands. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2000, 10, 2067–2070.
(9) Wesolowski, S.; Jorgensen, W. Estimation of binding afﬁnities
for celecoxib analogues with COX-2 via Monte Carlo-extended linear
response. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2002, 12, 267–270.
(10) Beveridge, D. L.; Dicapua, F. M. Free energy via molecular
simulation - applications to chemical and biomolecular systems. Annu. ReV.
Biophys. Biol. 1989, 18, 431–492.
(11) Straatsma, T.; McCammon, J. Computational alchemy. Annu. ReV.
Phys. Chem. 1992, 43, 407–435.
(12) Kollman, P. Free Energy Calculations: Applications to Chemical
and Biochemical Phenomena. Chem. Re V. 1993, 93, 2395–2417.
(13) Simonson, T.; Archontis, G.; Karplus, M. Free energy simulations
come of age: Protein-ligand recognition. Acc. Chem. Res. 2002, 35, 430–
437.
(14) Postma, J.; Berendsen, H. Thermodynamics of cavity formation
in wate r - a molecular-dynamics study. Symp. Chem. Soc. 1982, 17, 55–
67.
(15) Jorgensen, W.; Ravimohan, C. Monte-carlo simulation of differ-
ences in free-energies of hydration. J. Chem. Phys. 1985, 83, 3050–3054.
(16) Warshel, A. Dynamics of reactions in polar-solvents - Semi-
classical trajectory studies of electron-transfer and proton-transfer reactions.
J. Phys. Chem. 1982, 86, 2218–2224.
(17) Tember, B.; McCammon, A. Ligand receptor interactions. Comput.
Chem. 1984, 8, 281–283.
(18) Warshel, A. Simulating the Energetics and Dynamics of Enzymatic
Reactions. Pontiﬁciae Academiae Scientiarum Scripta Varia 1982, 55, 59–
81.
(19) Lybrand, T.; McCammon, A.; Wipff, G. Theoretical calculation
of relative binding-afﬁnity in host guest systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 1986, 83, 833–835.
(20) Wong, C. F.; McCammon, J. A. Dynamics and design of enzymes
and inhibitors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1986, 108, 3830–3832.
(21) Hermans, J.; Subramaniam, S. The free energy of xenon binding
to myoglobin from molecular dynamics simulation. Isr. J. Chem. 1986, 27,
225–227.
(22) MacKerell, A. D., Jr.; Bashford, D.; Bellott, M.; Dumbrack, R. L.,
Jr.; Evanseck, J. D.; Field, M. J.; Fischer, S.; Gao, J.; Guo, H.; Ha, S.;
Joseph-McCarthy, D.; Kuchnir, L.; Kuczera, K.; Lau, F. T. K.; Mattos, C.;
Michnick, S.; Ngo, T.; Nguyen, D. T.; Prodhom, B.; Reiher, W. E.; Roux,
B.; Schlenkrich, M.; Smith, J. C.; Stote, R.; Straub, J.; Watanabe, M.;
Wio´rkiewicz-Kuczera, J.; Yin, D.; Karplus, M. All-atom empirical potential
for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins. J. Phys. Chem.
B 1998, 102, 3586–3616.
(23) Cornell, W. D.; Cieplak, P.; Bayly, C. L.; Gould, I. R.; Merz,
K. M., Jr.; Ferguson, D. M.; Spellmeyer, D. C.; Fox, T.; Caldwell, J. W.;
Kollman, P. A. A second generation force ﬁeld for the simulation of proteins,
nucleic acids, and organic molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 5179–
5197.
(24) Jorgensen, W. L.; Maxwell, D. S.; Tirado-Rives, J. Development
and testing of the OPLS all-atom froce ﬁeld on conformational energetics
and properties of organic liquids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996, 118, 11225–
11236.
(25) Wang, J.; Wolf, R. M.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case,
D. A. Development and testing of a general amber force ﬁeld. J. Comput.
Chem. 2004, 25, 1157–1174.
(26) Shirts, M. R.; Pitera, J. W.; Swope, W. C.; Pande, V. S. Extremely
precise free energy calculations of amino acid side chain analogs:
Comparison of common molecular mechanics force ﬁelds for proteins.
J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 5740–5761.
(27) Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Hydration of amino acid side chains: Nonpolar
and electrostatic contributions calculated from staged molecular dynamics
free energy simulations with explicit water molecules. J. Phys. Chem. B
2004, 108, 16567–16576.
(28) Wan, S.; Stote, R. H.; Karplus, M. Calculation of the aqueous
solvation energy and entropy, as well as free energy, of simple polar solutes.
J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 121, 9539–9548.
(29) Mobley, D.; Dumont, E.; Chodera, J.; Dill, K. Comparison of
charge models for ﬁxed-charge force ﬁelds: Small-molecule hydration free
energies in explicit solvent. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 2242–2254.
(30) Mobley, D. L.; Bayly, C. I.; Cooper, M. D.; Shirts, M. R.; Dill,
K. A. Small molecule hydration free energies in explicit solvent: An
extensive test of ﬁxed-charge atomistic simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B ,i n
press.
2244 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux


--- PAGE 12 ---
(31) Shivakumar, D.; Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Calculation of absolute
solvation free energies of small molecules using explicit and implicit solvent
model. J. Chem. Theory Comput. , in press.
(32) Nicholls, A.; Mobley, D.; Guthrie, J.; Chodera, J.; Bayly, C.;
Cooper, M.; Pande, V. Predicting small-molecule solvation free energies:
an informal blind test for computational chemistry. J. Med. Chem. 2008,
51, 769–779.
(33) Maccallum, J. L.; Tieleman, D. P. Calculation of the water-
cyclohexane transfer free energies of neutral amino acid side-chain analogs
using the OPLS all-atom force ﬁeld. J. Comput. Chem. 2003, 24, 1930–
1935.
(34) Hermans, J.; Wang, L. Inclusion of loss of translational and
rotational freedom in theoretical estimates of free energies of binding.
application to a complex of benzene and mutant T4 lysozyme. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 1997, 119, 2707–2714.
(35) Mann, G.; Hermans, J. Modeling protein-small molecule interac-
tions: Structure and thermodynamics of noble gases binding in a cavity in
mutant phage T4 lysozyme L99A. J. Mol. Biol. 2000, 302, 979–989.
(36) Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Calculation of standard binding free energies:
Aromatic molecules in the T4 lysozyme L99A mutant. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 2006, 2, 1255–1273.
(37) Mobley, D. L.; Chodera, J. D.; Dill, K. A. On the use of
orientational restraint and symmetry corrections in alchemical free energy
calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 084902.
(38) Mobley, D. L.; Chodera, J. D.; Dill, K. A. Conﬁne-and-release
method: Obtaining correct binding free energies in the presence of protein
conformational change. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2007, 3, 1231–1235.
(39) Mobley, D. L.; Graves, A. P.; Chodera, J. D.; McReynolds, A. C.;
Shoichet, B. K.; Dill, K. A. Predicting absolute ligand binding free energies
to a simple model site. J. Mol. Biol. 2007, 371, 1118–1134.
(40) Shirts, M. R. Calculating precise and accurate free energies in
biomolecular systems. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, 2005.
(41) Fujitani, H.; Tanida, Y.; Ito, M.; Jayachandran, G.; Snow, C. D.;
Shirts, M. R.; Sorin, E. J.; Pande, V. S. Direct calculation of the binding
free energies of FKBP ligands. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 084108.
(42) Wang, J.; Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Absolute binding free energy
calculations using molecular dynamics simulations with restraint potentials.
Biophys. J. 2006, 91, 2798–2814.
(43) Lee, M. S.; Olson, M. A. Calculation of absolute portein-ligand
binding afﬁnity using path and endpoint approaches. Biophys. J. 2006, 90,
864–877.
(44) Jayachandran, G.; Shirts, M. R.; Park, S.; Pande, V. S. Parallelized-
over-parts computation of absolute binding free energy with docking and
molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 084901.
(45) Rajamani, R.; Good, A. C. Ranking poses in structure-based lead
discovery and optimization: current trends in scoring function development.
Curr. Opin. Drug Disco Very De V. 2007, 10, 308–15.
(46) Seifert, M. H. J.; Kraus, J.; Kramer, B. Virtual high-throughput
screening of molecular databases. Curr. Opin. Drug Disco Very DeV. 2007,
10, 298–307.
(47) Kontoyianni, M.; Madhav, P.; Suchanek, E.; Seibel, W. Theoretical
and practical considerations in virtual screening: a beaten ﬁeld. Curr. Med.
Chem. 2008, 15, 107–16.
(48) Kim, J.; Hamilton, A.; Bailey, C.; Domaoal, R.; Domoal, R.;
Wang, L.; Anderson, K.; Jorgensen, W. FEP-guided selection of bicyclic
heterocycles in lead optimization for non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1
reverse transcriptase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 15372–15373.
(49) Thakur, V.; Kim, J.; Hamilton, A.; Bailey, C.; Domaoal, R.; Wang,
L.; Anderson, K.; Jorgensen, W. Optimization of pyrimidinyl- and triazinyl-
amines as non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. Bioorg.
Med. Chem. Lett. 2006, 16, 5664–5667.
(50) Zeevaart, J.; Wang, L.; Thakur, V.; Leung, C.; Tirado-Rives, J.;
Bailey, C.; Domaoal, R.; Anderson, K.; Jorgensen, W. Optimization of
azoles as anti-human immunodeﬁciency virus agents guided by free-energy
calculations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 9492–9499.
(51) Jorgensen, W.; Thomas, L. T. Perspective on Free-Energy
Perturbation Calculations for Chemical Equilibria.J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2008, 4, 869–876.
(52) Helms, V.; Wade, R. C. Computational alchemy to calculate
absolute protein-ligand binding free energy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120,
2710–2713.
(53) Luo, H.; Sharp, K. On the calculation of absolute macromolecular
binding free energies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99, 10399–10404.
(54) Boresch, S.; Tettinger, F.; Leitgeb, M.; Karplus, M. Absolute
binding free energies: A quantitative approach for their calculation. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2003, 107, 9535–9551.
(55) Woo, H.-J.; Roux, B. Calculation of absolute protein-ligand
binding free energy from computer simulations.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2005, 102, 6825–6830.
(56) Roux, B.; Nina, M.; Pome `s, R.; Smith, J. C. Thermodynamic
stability of water molecules in the bacteriorhodopsin proton channel: A
molecular dynamics free energy perturbation study. Biophys. J. 1996, 71,
670–681.
(57) Gilson, M. K.; Given, J. A.; Bush, B. L.; Andrew McCammon, J.
The statistical-thermaldynamic basis for computation of binding afﬁnities:
A critical review. Biophys. J. 1997, 72, 1047–1069.
(58) Bjerrum, N. Untersuchungen u¨ber Ionenassoziation. I. der Einﬂuss
der Ionenassoziation auf die Akativita ¨t der Ionen bei Mittleren Assozia-
tionsgraden. K. Dan. Vidensk. Selsk. 1926, 7, 1–48.
(59) Mihailescu, M.; Gilson, M. K. On the theory of noncovalent
binding. Biophys. J. 2004, 87, 23–36.
(60) Hunenberger, P.; van Gunsteren, W. F. Experimental and theoreti-
cal approach to hydrogen-bonded diastereomeric interactions in a model
complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 119, 7533–7544.
(61) Jorgensen, W. L. Free energy calculations: a breakthrough for
modeling organic chemistry in solution. Acc. Chem. Res. 1989, 22, 184–
189.
(62) Jorgensen, W. L. Interactions between amides in solution and the
thermodynamics of weak binding. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1989, 111, 3770–
3771.
(63) Allen, T. W.; Andersen, O. S.; Roux, B. Energetics of ion
conduction through the gramicidin channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2004, 101, 117–122.
(64) Beutler, T. C.; van Gunsteren, W. F. Molecular dynamics free
energy calculation in four dimensions. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 1417–
1422.
(65) Pomès, R.; Eisenmesser, E.; Post, C.; Roux, B. Calculating excess
chemical potentials using dynamic simulations in the fourth dimension.
J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 111, 3387–3395.
(66) Rodinger, T.; Howell, P. L.; Pomès, R. Absolute free energy
calculations by thermodynamic integration in four spatial dimensions.
J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 34104.
(67) Zacharias, M.; Straatsma, T. P.; McCammon, J. A. Separation-
shifted scaling, a new scaling method for lennard-jones interactions in
thermodynamic integration. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100, 9025–9031.
(68) Beveridge, D. L.; DiCapua, F. M. Free energy via molecular
simulation: Applications to chemical and biomolecular systems. Annu. ReV.
Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 1989, 18, 431–492.
(69) Kollman, P. Free energy calculations: Applications to chemical
and biochemical phenomena. Chem. Re V. 1993, 93, 2395–2417.
(70) Kollman, P. A.; Massova, I.; Reyes, C.; Kuhn, B.; Huo, S.; Chong,
L.; Lee, M.; Lee, T.; Duan, Y.; Wang, W.; Donini, O.; Cieplak, P.;
Srinivasan, J.; Case, D. A.; Cheatham, T. E., III. Calculating structures and
free energies of complex molecules: Combining molecular mechanics and
continuum models. Acc. Chem. Res. 2000, 33, 889–897.
(71) Swanson, J. M. J.; Henchman, R. H.; McCammon, J. A. Revisiting
free energy calculations: A theoretical connection to MM/PBSA and direct
calculation of the association free energy. Biophys. J. 2004, 86, 67–74.
(72) Åqvist, J.; Luzhkov, V. B.; Brandsdal, B. O. Ligand binding
afﬁnities from MD simulations. Acc. Chem. Res. 2002, 35, 358–365.
(73) Sham, Y. Y.; Chu, Z. T.; Tao, H.; Warshel, A. Examining methods
for calculations of binding free energies: LRA, LIE, PDLD-LRA, and
PDLD/S-LRA calculations of ligands binding to an HIV protease. Proteins:
Struct., Funct., Genet. 2000, 39, 393–407.
(74) Souaille, M.; Roux, B. Extension to the weighted histogram
analysis method: Combining umbrella sampling with free energy calcula-
tions. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2001, 135, 40–57.
(75) Axelsen, P.; Li, D. Improved convergence in dual-topology free
energy calculations through use of harmonic restraints. J. Comput. Chem.
1998, 19, 1278–1283.
(76) Leitgeb, M.; Schro ¨der, C.; Boresch, S. Alchemical free energy
calculations and multiple conformational substates. J. Chem. Phys. 2005,
122, 84109.
(77) van Duijneveldt, S.; Frenkel, D. Computer-simulation study of
free-energy barriers in crystal nucleation. J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 96, 4655–
4668.
(78) Patey, G. N.; Valleau, J. P. A Monte Carlo method for obtaining
the interionic potential of mean force in ionic solution. J. Chem. Phys. 1975,
63, 2334–2339.
(79) Weeks, J. D.; Chandler, D.; Andersen, H. C. Role of repulsive
forces in determining the equilibrium structure of simple liquids. J. Chem.
Phys. 1971, 54, 5237–5247.
(80) Chandler, D.; Pratt, L. Statistical-mechanics of chemical-equilibria
and intramolecular structures of nonrigid molecules in condensed phases.
J. Chem. Phys. 1976, 65, 2925–2940.
(81) Roux, B.; Simonson, T. Implicit solvent models. Biophys. Chem.
1999, 78, 1–20.
(82) Roux, B.; Andersen, O.; Allen, T. Comment on “Free energy
simulations of single and double ion occupancy in gramicidin A”. J. Chem.
Phys. 2008, 128, 227101.
(83) Roux, B.; Simonson, T. Implicit solvent models. Biophys. Chem.
1999, 78, 1–20.
(84) King, G.; Lee, F.; Warshel, A. Microscopic simulation of
macroscopic dielectric constants of solvated proteins. J. Chem. Phys. 1991,
95, 4365–4377.
Feature Article J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 2245


--- PAGE 13 ---
(85) Beglov, D.; Roux, B. Finite representation of an inﬁnite bulk
system: Solvent boundary potential for computer simulations.J. Chem. Phys.
1994, 100, 9050–9063.
(86) Im, W.; Berne `che, S.; Roux, B. Generalized solvent boundary
potential for computer simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 114, 2924–2937.
(87) Morton, A.; Baase, W. A.; Matthews, B. W. Energetic origins of
speciﬁcity of ligand binding in an interior nonpolar cavity of T4 lysozyme.
Biochemistry 1995, 34, 8564–8575.
(88) Wei, B. Q.; Baase, W. A.; Weaver, L. H.; Matthews, B. W.;
Shoichet, B. K. A model binding site for testing scoring functions in
molecular docking. J. Mol. Biol. 2002, 322, 339–355.
(89) Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Computation of binding free energy with
molecular dynamics and grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations.J. Chem.
Phys. 2008, 128, 115103.
(90) Woo, H.-J.; Dinner, A. R.; Roux, B. Grand canonical Monte Carlo
simulation of water in protein environments. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 121,
6392–6400.
(91) Chipot, C.; Rozanska, X.; Dixit, S. Can free energy calculations
be fast and accurate at the same time? Binding of low-afﬁnity, non-peptide
inhibitors to the SH2 domain of the src protein. J. Comput.-Aided Mol.
Des. 2005, 19, 765–770.
(92) Gan, W.; Roux, B. Binding speciﬁcity of SH2 domains: Insight
from free energy simulations. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. , in press.
(93) Morton, A.; Matthews, B. W. Speciﬁcity of ligand binding in a
buried nonpolar cavity of T4 lysozyme: Linkage of dynamics and structural
plasticity. Biochemistry 1995, 34, 8576–8588.
(94) Kissinger, C. R.; Parge, H. E.; Knighton, D. R.; Lewis, C. T.;
Pelletier, L. A.; Tempczyk, A.; Kalish, V. J.; Tucker, K. D.; Showalter,
R. E.; Moomaw, E. W.; Gastinel, L. N.; Habuka, N.; Chen, X.; Maldonado,
F.; Barker, J. E.; Bacquet, R.; Villafranca, J. E. Crystal structures of human
calcineurin and the human FKBP12-FK506-calcineurin complex. Nature
1995, 378, 641–644.
(95) Grifﬁth, J. P.; Kim, J. L.; Kim, E. E.; Sintchak, M. D.; Thomson,
J. A.; Fitzgibbon, M. J.; Fleming, M. A.; Caron, P. R.; Hsiao, K.; Navia,
M. A. X-ray structure of calcineurin inhibited by the immunophilin-
immunosuppressant FKBP12-FK506 complex. Cell 1995, 82, 507–522.
(96) Hamelberg, D.; McCammon, J. A. Standard free energy of
releasing a localized water molecule from the binding pockets of proteins:
Double-decoupling method. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 7683–7689.
(97) Olano, L. R.; Rick, S. W. Hydration free energies and entropies
for water in protein interiors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 7991–8000.
(98) Levy, R. M.; Zhang, L. Y.; Gallicchio, E.; Felts, A. K. On the
nonpolar hydration free energy of proteins: Surface area and continuum
solvent models for the solute-solvent interaction energy. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2003, 125, 9523–9530.
(99) Kuntz, I. D.; Chen, K.; Sharp, K. A.; Kollman, P. A. The maximal
afﬁnity of ligands. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1999, 96, 9997–10002.
(100) Meirovitch, H. Recent developments in methodologies for calcu-
lating the entropy and free energy of biological systems by computer
simulation. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2007, 17, 181–186.
(101) Chang, C. A.; Chen, W.; Gilson, M. K. Ligand conﬁgurational
entropy and protein binding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 1534–
1539.
(102) Hummer, G.; Szabo, A. Free energy surfaces from single-molecule
force spectroscopy. Acc. Chem. Res. 2005, 38, 504–513.
(103) Collins, M. D.; Hummer, G.; Quillin, M. L.; Matthews, B. W.;
Gruner, S. M. Cooperative water ﬁlling of a nonpolar protein cavity observed
by high-pressure crystallography and simulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2005, 102, 16668–16671.
(104) Yin, H.; Hummer, G.; Rasaiah, J. C. Metastable water clusters in
the nonpolar cavities of the thermostable protein tetrabrachion.J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2007, 129, 7369–7377.
(105) Li, Z.; Lazaridis, T. The effect of water displacement on binding
thermodynamics: Concanavalin A. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 662–670.
(106) Lu, Y.; Yang, C.-Y.; Wang, S. Binding free energy contribution
of interfacial waters in HIV-1 protease/inhibitor complexes. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2006, 128, 11830–11839.
(107) Li, Z.; Lazaridis, T. Water at biomolecular binding interfaces.Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2007, 9, 573–581.
(108) Helms, V.; Wade, R. C. Hydration energy landscape of the active
site cavity in cytochrome P450cam. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 1998,
32, 381–396.
(109) Barillari, C.; Taylor, J.; Viner, R.; Essex, J. W. Classiﬁcation of
water molecules in protein binding sites. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129,
2577–2587.
(110) Mancera, R. L. Molecular modeling of hydration in drug design.
Curr. Opin. Drug Disco Very De V. 2007, 10, 275–280.
(111) Oprea, T. I.; Hummer, G.; Garcı ´a, A. E. Identiﬁcation of a
functional water channel in cytochrome P450 enzymes. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 1997, 94, 2133–2138.
(112) Cojocaru, V.; Winn, P. J.; Wade, R. C. The ins and outs of
cytochrome P450s. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2007, 1770, 390–401.
(113) Garcı´a, A. E.; Hummer, G. Water penetration and escape in
proteins. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2000, 38, 261–272.
(114) Resat, H.; Mezei, M. Grand canonical ensemble Monte Carlo
simulation of the dCpG/proﬂavine crystal hydrate. Biophys. J. 1996, 71,
1179–1190.
(115) Clark, M.; Guarnieri, F.; Shkurko, I.; Wiseman, J. Grand canonical
Monte Carlo simulation of ligand-protein binding. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2006, 46, 231–242.
(116) http://sampl.eyesopen.com/.
(117) Hornak, V.; Okur, A.; Rizzo, R.; Simmerling, C. HIV-1 protease
ﬂaps spontaneously open and reclose in molecular dynamics simulations.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2006, 103, 915–920.
(118) Hornak, V.; Okur, A.; Rizzo, R.; Simmerling, C. HIV-1 protease
ﬂaps spontaneously close to the correct structure in simulations following
manual placement of an inhibitor into the open state. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2006, 128, 2812–2813.
(119) Hornak, V.; Simmerling, C. Targeting structural ﬂexibility in
HIV-1 protease inhibitor binding. Drug Disco Very Today 2007, 12, 132–
138.
(120) Armstrong, N.; Mayer, M.; Gouaux, E. Tuning activation of the
AMPA-sensitive GluR2 ion channel by genetic adjustment of agonist-
induced conformational changes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003, 100,
5736–5741.
(121) Lau, A.; Roux, B. The free energy landscapes governing confor-
mational changes in a glutamate receptor ligand-binding domain. Structure
2007, 15, 1203–1214.
(122) Banavali, N.; Roux, B. Free energy landscape of A-DNA to
B-DNA conversion in aqueous solution.J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 6866–
6876.
(123) Banavali, N.; Roux, B. The N-terminal end of the catalytic domain
of SRC kinase Hck is a conformational switch implicated in long-range
allosteric regulation. Structure 2005, 13, 1715–1723.
(124) Elber, R. Long-timescale simulation methods. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 2005, 15, 151–156.
(125) Maragliano, L.; Fischer, A.; Vanden-Eijnden, E.; Ciccotti, G. String
method in collective variables: minimum free energy paths and isocommittor
surfaces. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 24106.
(126) Christen, M.; van Gunsteren, W. F. On searching in, sampling
of, and dynamically moving through conformational space of biomolecular
systems: A review. J. Comput. Chem. 2008, 29, 157–166.
(127) Pan, A.; Sezer, D.; Roux, B. Finding transition pathways using
the string method with swarms of trajectories. J. Phys. Chem. B 2008, 112,
3432–3440.
(128) Jakalian, A.; Bush, B. L.; Jack, D. B.; Bayly, C. I. Fast, efﬁcient
generation of high-quality atomic charges. AM1-BCC model: I. Method.
J. Comput. Chem. 2000, 21, 132–146.
(129) Jakalian, A.; Jack, D. B.; Bayly, C. I. Fast, efﬁcient generation of
high-quality atomic charges. AM1-BCC model: II. Parameterization and
Validation. J. Comput. Chem. 2002, 23, 1623–1641.
(130) Jiao, D.; Golubkov, P.; Darden, T.; Ren, P. Calculation of protein-
ligand binding free energy by using a polarizable potential.Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 2008, 105, 6290–6295.
(131) Gohlke, H.; Klebe, G. Approaches to the description and prediction
of the binding afﬁnity of small-molecule ligand to macromolecular receptors.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2002, 41, 2644–2676.
(132) Pospisil, P.; Ballmer, P.; Scapozza, L.; Folkers, G. Tautomerism
in computer-aided drug design. J. Recept. Signal Transduction Res. 2003,
23, 361–371.
(133) Anisimov, V.; Lamoureux, G.; Vorobyov, I.; Huang, N.; Roux,
B.; MacKerell, A. Determination of electrostatic parameters for a polarizable
force ﬁeld based on the classical Drude oscillator. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2005, 1, 153–168.
JP807701H
2246 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 113, No. 8, 2009 Deng and Roux
